Another Balkan High Noon. .
With the world focused on Iraq, North Korea, and a possible clash with Iran over nuclear weapons, Kosovo has fallen off the radar screen. .
That inattention will end soon; a decision about the province's fate is looming. .
The United States and its European friends have repeatedly stated their intent to make the difficult decision before the end of the year on whether to separate Kosovo from Serbia. .
This decision -- crucial to the future of an unstable region -- will test Western determination and unity. .
Negotiations this year in Vienna, brokered by the United Nations, showed that an agreed settlement between Serbia and Kosovo on "final status" will not happen. .
Talks continue, but, as UN negotiator and former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari diplomatically told the Security Council, they are effectively dead. .
No Serbian leader will agree to Kosovo's independence, because nationalism remains the dominant political force in the country. .
Indeed, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, the apostle of Serbian nationalism, has been trying in every way to undermine Kosovo's interim government. .
He is rushing to hold a national referendum this month on a new constitution without serious parliamentary debate or the usual public education. .
The Palestinian leader, Abu Mazen, recognizes this, but the question is whether he can deliver. .
The Palestinian leadership could also start down the difficult road of telling the refugees that -- contrary to almost 50 years of Palestinian propaganda -- they will not return to Israel, but will have to be settled in the West Bank and Gaza, the areas that will become part of the eventual Palestinian state. .
In an ideal world, conflicts end by agreements and treaties. .
But in the real world -- and Cyprus, Bosnia, and Kosovo may be examples -- stabilization and the slow de-escalation of violence can sometimes achieve the same end, even without formal agreement. .
In the absence of plausible alternatives, one hopes that this will also be the case for Israelis and Palestinians. .
A World Restored? .
BERLIN: Like old battle horses feeling young as the bugle sounds, Cold War strategists are feeling the adrenalin mount as missile defense becomes front page news. .
True, the defense against missiles which Bill Clinton (reluctantly) and George W. Bush (enthusiastically) are proposing -- with massive support from America's Congress -- is different from Ronald Reagan's Star Wars dream of twenty years ago: NMD is supposed to catch only a modest number of warheads, not provide complete protection against enemy missiles. .
Nevertheless, the issue rekindles old debates over deterrence, mutual assured destruction and nuclear arms control, and revives the rivalry between the nuclear powers just when nuclear weapons had lost much of their relevance. .
Amazingly, debate is heating up even though it is uncertain that NMD will work. .
The main purpose of his new constitution is its preamble, which enshrines Kosovo as an inalienable part of Serbia. .
Even if it does work, it will be ten to fifteen years, possibly longer, before NMD is operational. .
So tempers are rising over something which, if and when it happens in the distant future, may or may not have much impact. .
Normally cautious governments are positioning themselves now as if the future were around the corner. .
What explains this odd behavior? .
Not blind faith in technology. .
After all, the history of missile defense is a tale of technology constantly disappointing its advocates in and out of government. .
No one in his right mind can assume that something never achieved before, namely destroying a small number of warheads in flight, will happen over night. .
Of the three tests so far conducted, one failed almost, two entirely, which is why President Clinton left the matter to his successor. .
If President Bush, as he has hinted, now favors a different design, it will take even more time to develop the architecture and devise a test program. .
Nobody can be sure that it will work either. .
Kosovo's ethnic Albanians have proclaimed that they will not accept any tie to Serbia, no matter how tenuous. .
Governments are worried now, not because of capabilities, but because of America's real or imagined intentions. .
While Americans claim that NMD is not directed against anyone, that all the US wants is to protect its citizens against states like Iraq or North Korea, almost everyone else thinks differently: Russians fear that America wants to cement its military superiority (and Russia's inferiority) forever; the Chinese are concerned that NMD signals American readiness to help Taiwan remain independent; Europeans worry that America's plans invite tensions with Russia and may separate the US from Europe. .
Because political intentions, not technical capabilities matter, NMD creates problems now: it pushes Russia into confrontation, heightens Chinese nervousness, and underpins a European sense of estrangement from the US. .
Damage is done from the word go while the end of the road remains obscured. .
Inflating this political damage is the fact that, thirty years ago, the US and the then Soviet Union renounced effective defense against strategic nuclear missiles. .
Normally, a US defense project in its infancy would not cause the excitement NMD generates. .
But the 1972 ABM Treaty prohibits, for the indefinite future, systems to protect either country against such nuclear attack. .
As the US proceeds with NMD, it will either have to violate the Treaty or give six months notice to quit, something both signatories are entitled to do if they feel their vital security interests demand it. .
In the eyes of many, that would amount to America opting out of the structure of nuclear arms control built in the latter part of the Cold War. .
The Bush Administration argues that, because the Cold War is over, the formal disappearance of the ABM Treaty would not mean a loss of nuclear stability. .
Throughout the 1990's, they virtually opted out of Serbian-run Kosovo by creating parallel institutions. .
But stability is as much a matter of political perceptions as of technical calculations. .
By limiting strategic missile defense, the old treaty provides a certain predictability of deterrence for all nuclear weapon states. .
Its disappearance would affect all other arms control agreements. .
Russia threatens to scrap all of them once the US leaves the ABM-Treaty. .
While this threat lacks credibility (it would harm Russian interests most) it has a certain logic. .
The main question NMD poses is not how to prepare for a future world of missile defense but how to dampen today's political concerns. .
Such efforts are getting discretely underway. .
Legal experts in Washington suggest that modest preparations for building missile and radar sites do not violate the ABM-Treaty and so do not yet require a US notice to quit. .
For now, the Bush Administration will await the outcome of tests before deciding. .
Both Moscow and Washington hint at possible deep cuts in their offensive nuclear arsenals. .
Their forced mass exodus in 1999 and NATO's subsequent intervention, which ended Serbia's rule and established a quasi-state under UN administration, has made anything other than independence intolerable. .
Skeptical European allies are being mollified by US assurances of close consultation. .
The most important of confidence-building measures, a modification of the ABM-Treaty to allow for limited missile defense, is being explored. .
Russia's early "nyet" may not be the last word. .
So political turmoil with Russia and Europe might be calmed. .
But what about China? .
In contrast to Europe and Russia, China is not party to an alliance (as is Europe) or to a network of arms control treaties through which political solutions can evolve (like Russia), factors that contribute to Asian instabilities and Chinese sensitivity. .
Here confidence can only be built through the approach taken by the US to China. .
Regrettably, there are no indications yet that the problem is recognized in Washington as a serious one. .
All this comes as a disappointment to old Cold War strategists. .
While brushing up the vocabulary and abbreviations of the age of superpower deterrence, they discover that such a world has gone. .
Some time over the next month or two, the Balkan Contact Group — the US, UK, France, Germany, Italy, and Russia -- will consider Ahtisaari's recommendations on Kosovo's final status and possibly propose a solution to the Security Council, which must make the final decision. .
Missile defense is not a threat to US-Russian strategic stability; its mishandling is a threat to political predictability. .
In public, all Contact Group members have tried to leave the question of Kosovo's final status open, but informally the US and some of its allies have told the two parties that they will propose independence this year. .
Some members of the Security Council -- particularly Russia and China -- are opposed to or skeptical of an imposed settlement, and few governments favor dividing up another country's territory, however compelling the circumstances. .
Whether the Security Council will approve independence largely depends on averting a Russian veto, which will require considerable diplomatic effort. .
The nature of the independence bestowed is also important. .
An independent Kosovo must be secured and its minorities protected. .
Northern Kosovo, now largely under Belgrade's control, must not be partitioned off in all but name. .
In the interest of reducing the blow to Serbia, the Security Council must avoid granting independence in ways that are so contorted that the new state cannot effectively function. .
If the Security Council fails to reach a decision on final status, it will produce a GRAVE situation: Kosovo would declare independence unilaterally, and all nations would have to make up their mind whether or not to recognize the new state. .
If that happens, it is likely that the Serbs of North Kosovo would declare their own independence. .
At a minimum, Serbia would campaign strongly against recognition. .
In fact, Serbia's government is already trying to persuade the West to postpone a decision until mid-2007. .
It claims that if Kosovo is granted independence, the ultranationalist Radical Party will come to power in the next elections, and believes that holding elections as early as this year will cause the Contact Group to delay a proposal to the Security Council. .
Moreover, the government has encouraged the leaders of Bosnia's Republika Srpska to threaten to hold their own referendum on separation from a still fragile Bosnia. .
And they continue to push &#45;&#45; unsuccessfully &#45;&#45; for Ahtisaari's removal in order to prolong the Vienna talks. .
The timing of the constitutional referendum appears to be a part of this delaying strategy. .
Some hope that postponement will stimulate violence in Kosovo and further encourage Western reconsideration of independence. .
That tactic may be working. .
Many European Union countries are worried about the implications of taking away a country's territory, as well as the impact of Kosovo's independence on Serbian democracy. .
Given Serbia's political instability, they question the harm of a short-term postponement -- albeit mostly self-inflicted. .
But delay only offers more room for Kostunica to find ways to make a Security Council decision more difficult. .
The West must ignore Belgrade's siren song. .
Serbian politics will be chaotic and unstable for the foreseeable future, and Serbian politicians will attempt to present this as an excuse to avoid facing the loss of Kosovo. .
Likewise, there will be problems establishing ties between Serbia and Kosovo under any circumstances. .
But failure to proceed definitively now on Kosovo's final status will produce a worse Balkan situation, one that blocks Serbia's move toward the West and ultimate membership in the EU, condemns Kosovo's ethnic minorities to dangerous ambiguity, and imperils fragile states like Bosnia and Macedonia. .
No realistic solution exists for Kosovo but independence. .
If Serbia wants to join the West, it must not forsake that opportunity by trapping itself in its nationalist past. .
South Korea's Dangerous New Dawn .
North Korea's decision to expel UN atomic energy inspectors is but another reason to view Roh Moo Hyun's election as South Korea's president two weeks ago as an historical watershed. .
The beginning of his term not only coincides with one of the most dangerous episodes on the Korean peninsula in decades, but his presidency will also test South Korea's relations with the US to a degree that has not been seen for many years. .
Roh's victory over Lee Hoi Chang signifies a generational shift in Korean politics, with the young determined to gain a freer hand in Korea's relations with the US. .
Indeed, generational differences were the deciding factor in the race, replacing the regional sentiments that dominated every presidential race before this one. .
According to one report, over 60% of people in their twenties and thirties voted for Roh to produce a margin of 2.3% in this first two-man, head-to-head presidential race in 31 years. .
Roh's populist and nationalist stance will be swiftly and sorely tested by reality when he assumes power in February. .
But couple the generational changeover thaty put him in office with a strong popular desire for continued engagement with North Korea--notwithstanding North Korea's growing nuclear brinkmanship--and the recipe is complete for disputes with the US. .
Roh, a self-made man who passed a bar examination without going to college and law school, succeeded in convincing voters that he would usher in a new brand of politics reflecting South Korea's growing wealth and middle class sentiments, thereby sweeping away insider-dominated politics, regional bickering, and factional struggles. .
His style and rhetoric projected the fresh (for Korea!) image of a common man committed to eliminating the ossified networks of cronyism and corruption. .
For the first time in modern Korean history, the presidential campaign actually debated the central issues facing the country, rather than focussing on parties and personalities. .
Candidate Roh called for a new relationship between South Korea and the US, one based on the principle of independence and equality. .
For example, he said that he would not kow-tow to the US or visit Washington just for the sake of a photo opportunity He also promised to continue President Kim Dae Jung's "Sunshine policy" of engagement with the North. .
Remarkably, Roh won the election despite North Korea's decision to reactivate nuclear reactors that had been frozen since 1994. .
A few years ago this would have doomed Roh's candidacy. .
That he overcame this obstacle without changing his stance on engaging North Korea means that times have radically changed. .
A popular yearning for change, not the security situation, is now the overriding concern of ordinary Koreans. .
Roh's campaign also took advantage of a rising tide of anti-Americanism. .
The acquittal by a US military court of two American soldiers who accidentally killed two Korean schoolgirls with their armored car last June triggered street demonstrations across the country. .
Although President George W. Bush apologized twice for the deaths of the girls, demands continue to escalate for changing the Status of Force Agreement (SOFA) that governs the legal treatment of American troops stationed in South Korea. .
Ordinary Koreans insist that US soldiers who commit crimes should be tried in Korean courts. .
This expression of wounded national pride was enabled by South Korea's tremendous performance in the World Cup football tournament last summer, which helped convince ordinary Koreans that their country was fully grown up--and thus might be able to stand on its own without the presence of 37,000 US troops. .
Indeed, many ordinary people now view the US presence, and not North Korea's communist regime, as the biggest obstacle to unification. .
According to a recent poll, only 54.8% of Koreans now support the stationing of American troops in the country, while 31.7% oppose it. .
These sentiments will form part of the diplomatic test shaping Roh's presidency from the start, for he must re-engineer relations with America at the same time that the Bush administration is fretting about North Korea's nuclear ambitions and its role in spreading weapons of mass destruction to rogue states. .
For now, Korean voters--apparently impervious to the threat that North Korea's nuclear weapons poses--support Roh's policy of maintaining dialogue and economic exchange with the North. .
Under President Roh, South Korea's domestic politics and relations with the US and North Korea will require an almost total overhaul. .
Can he walk the tightrope of maintaining security on the peninsula, keeping America engaged, and retaining the support of the voters who elected him? .
Reconciling those goals would test even the most experienced and cynical of politicians, so it is anyone's guess as to whether President Roh can succeed. .
Failure, however, offers such a horrific prospect that no one can possibly hope for it. .
The Unilateral Road to Peace .
In the next three weeks, the Israeli army will do something unprecedented: instead of defending the country against external enemies or terrorism, it will evacuate -- by force if necessary -- 9,000 Israelis from their homes. .
Israel's unilateral withdrawal is the outcome of a deep political shift that has been caused by two somewhat contradictory convictions that have characterized Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's policies since 2003: first, that the US-initiated "road map" is going nowhere and, second, that the status quo is untenable. .
Certainly, according to Sharon's thinking, there is no future for 9,000 Jewish settlers living among 1.2 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. .
Hence, in the absence of negotiations, a unilateral withdrawal is the only meaningful step towards de-escalation and stabilization. .
This policy has deeply divided Israel: the settlers -- mostly, but not exclusively religious -- feel betrayed by Sharon, "The Father of the Settlements." .
It is now the Israeli left that, however reluctantly, realizes that Sharon's new pragmatism may be the first step in the right direction. .
Like de Gaulle in Algeria, Sharon has reshuffled the cards of Israel's politics. .
The last weeks have seen massive demonstrations, some of them verging on violence; many of the settlers have declared that they will not obey government orders to evacuate. .
The army and the police have mobilized almost 50,000 troops to carry out evictions. .
This forcible approach is traumatic not only for the settlers, but also for many other Israelis. .
Only the next days and weeks will tell whether the evacuation proceeds peacefully or not. .
In the meantime, Sharon has paid heavily for his policies. .
Two right-wing parties have left his ruling coalition, he has lost his majority within his own Likud Party, and his finance minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, has quit his government. .
Only by bringing Shimon Peres's Labor Party into his cabinet did Sharon manage to retain his parliamentary majority. .
The question, of course, is what will happen after the Gaza disengagement. .
Many governments were initially skeptical about disengagement, but realized that -- as the Washington saying goes -- "this is the only game in town." .
Among them, as well as among the Palestinians, one hears the hope that after the Gaza withdrawal, it will be possible to return to the road map and to resume negotiations leading to a final agreement between Israel and the Palestinians. .
This is a major mistake. .
While motivated by the best of intentions, the hope of reviving the road map is out of touch with reality. .
Future negotiations will have to deal with the ultimate borders between Israel and Palestine, the fate of 200,000 Jewish settlers in the West Bank, the status of Jerusalem, and with the problem of the 1947-48 Palestinian refugees. .
On all of these issues, the gulf between the Israeli and Palestinian positions has not narrowed since the failed negotiations at Camp David in 2000, while fear and distrust have increased. .
To attempt negotiations under these circumstances would not only be an exercise in futility, but may merely deepen alienation and suspicion on both sides. .
The failure of the Annan Plan for Cyprus suggests that good intentions are not enough -- and the disagreements in Cyprus were miniscule compared to what divides Israelis and Palestinians. .
So what can be done? .
Probably the only rational way to proceed would be to acknowledge that unilateral steps on both sides can still further the cause of de-escalation and ultimate reconciliation. .
On the Israeli side, further disengagement from dozens of isolated and small settlements on the West Bank, entailing the evacuation of between 20,000 and 30,000 settlers, may be politically feasible and would give the Palestinians a contiguous territory on the West Bank. .
On the Palestinian side, consolidation of the Palestinian Authority's control over a dozen security services and militias would be an important step. .
Government stipends for tuition and for new and enlarged universities can play a big role, as can investment in computers and information technology in schools and communities. .
The social agenda and the technology agenda are not independent of each other. .
Both call upon Latin American societies to invest more in their people, so that Latin Americans can join the cutting edge of global productivity. .
If these investments reach all parts of Latin America, rich and poor, the region's prospects will brighten enormously. .
Are Housing Prices a House of Cards? .
The first big city to boom was London, starting around 1996. .
Boom mentality spread to Los Angeles, New York, and Sydney around 1997, to Paris in 1998, to Miami, Moscow, and Shanghai in 2001, and Vancouver around 2002. .
These and other cities have been booming pretty much ever since; prices in most are up at least 50% in real terms since 2000. .
This has been a big windfall to homeowners, but has hurt anyone planning to buy. .
Now growth in home prices is weakening in some of these cities. .
Think of Nokia, the mobile phone maker. .
Due to the economies of scale that the common market made possible, Nokia was able to exploit its inventions fully, while Germany's Siemens recently decided to give up on the mobile phone market. .
The third shock was the euro, which has induced a rapid convergence of long-term interest rates, which in some countries had been five to seven percentage points above the German level. .
Freed from exchange-rate risk, international investors no longer demanded a risk premium from these countries and were willing to provide funds to all of them under the same favorable conditions that previously had been reserved for Germany. .
This is good for Europe, because it helps improve the allocation of capital and stimulates growth by transporting German savings to the remote and previously disadvantaged regions of the euro zone. .
But it is of doubtful benefit to German workers who also would have liked to cooperate with that capital. .
The fourth shock was eastern EU enlargement, which has brought extraordinary chances for trade and investment in the east, but has also brought massive low-wage competition. .
On average, wage costs in the ten countries that joined the EU in 2004 are only 14% of the West German level. .
Low-wage competition has led to substantial outsourcing and off-shoring activities that have kept German firms competitive by reducing their demand for domestic labor. .
As neither Germany's unions nor its welfare state would accept falling wages, the result was higher unemployment and slower growth. .
The rate of price growth in London and New York slowed sharply over the past year, to only about a 1% real increase in the second quarter of 2004. .
The fifth shock was German unification, which is a failure in economic terms. .
GDP per working-age person in East Germany had been 61% of the West German level in 1996, but it is now only 59%. .
The slow growth of the eastern part of the country has pulled down the Germany-wide average, while the enormous demand for public funds in the east has increased public debt. .
The weak fiscal position has in turn undermined investors' confidence, with obvious implications for economic growth. .
All five shocks constitute historical developments that are good for the world as a whole, but problematic for Germany. .
In order for the country to meet the challenges and to continue to grow, it would have to make its labor markets flexible. .
Only if wages adjust downward to accommodate the new international environment can German workers become competitive again, so that the country returns to a higher employment level, exploiting its human capital up to the capacity constraint. .
The new government that voters will most likely elect in September will be confronted with the difficult task of confronting Germans with reality and pushing through the necessary reforms. .
Only then will we know whether Germany can meet the Toynbeean challenge it is facing. .
Lessons from the Tsunami .
In Sydney, home prices actually fell in the second quarter. .
There are many lessons that emerge from the tsunami that brought such devastation and loss of life to Asia. .
It demonstrated the power of globalization, as television brought vivid pictures of the destruction to homes around the world. .
Indeed, it is at times like this that the world truly does seem like a global village. .
Of course, it seemed to take somewhat longer for news of the extent of the disaster to reach the Crawford, Texas, ranch of President Bush. .
But, in the end, he decided to interrupt his vacation and offer amounts of aid that were successively revised upwards, in a global competition which promised to benefit those who were desperate for help. .
America's aid still appeared niggardly when compared with the amounts offered by countries with a fraction of America's economic wealth. .
Lightly populated Australia offered more than twice America's assistance, Japan promised almost 50% more, and Europe pledged more than five times as much. .
This led many observers to reflect on the fact that the world's richest country was in general the most miserly in foreign assistance -- all the more so in comparison to the amount it spends on war and defense. .
The disaster was international, so it was appropriate that the United Nations take the lead in coordinating the relief effort. .
Unfortunately, in an effort that was widely seen as another attempt to undermine multilateralism, the US tried to lead a "core group" driving the assistance program, ignoring ongoing efforts within the region and at the UN. .
Has the boom ended? .
Whatever America's motive, it later wisely decided to join the UN effort. .
The Bush administration's face-saving rhetoric that it had rushed to push together the core group in the absence of other efforts was quietly let to pass. .
The response of some countries within the region was truly impressive, showing how far they had come in establishing efficient and effective governments. .
Myriad details were addressed: Thailand flew ambassadors to the affected part of the country to help attend to the needs of their citizens, helped those who lost their money and passports return home, provided health care for the injured, set up systems to identify bodies, and dealt with the difficulties posed by shortages of body bags and the lack of cold storage facilities. .
Countries, like Thailand, that felt that they could handle the finances on their own asked that assistance be directed to others. .
They did ask one thing: a reduction of tariff barriers and greater access to markets abroad. .
They didn't want a handout, only a chance to earn income. .
The response, at least at the time of this column's writing, has mostly been deafening silence. .
On the other hand, the G-7 made a truly important contribution in offering debt relief. .
This is especially important for Indonesia, which must service a debt of $132 billion (of which $70 billion is owed to public creditors or guaranteed by government agencies). .
Will no other cities benefit? .
Even without the tsunami, this debt burden would have been an enormous hindrance to the country's development as it finally recovers from the aftermath of the 1997 financial crisis. .
Indeed, there is a compelling case to be made for Indonesian debt relief in any case, given that much of the debt was incurred in loans to the corrupt Suharto government. .
Lenders knew, or should have known, that not all of the money was going to help Indonesian development. .
Moreover, some of the debt was incurred as part of the 1997-1998 crisis, which was aggravated and deepened by IMF-imposed policies. .
No one pretends that we can prevent or alter the forces of nature. .
Rather, we have to learn to cope with them. .
There are now calls for improved tsunami early warning systems. .
But in one area, global warming, we have already received an early warning. .
Most countries have recognized this, coming together in Rio and Kyoto to do something about it—not enough, but the Kyoto protocol was intended only as a start. .
Sadly, global warming will likely destroy some of the same countries ravaged by the tsunami. .
Worse still, could the mood in housing markets soon lead prices in downward? .
Low lying islands like the Maldives will become submerged. .
No one predicted this boom, so predicting its end is risky. .
Housing prices have shown tremendous upward momentum in the face of previous warnings that the party is over. .
Any prediction concerning the boom's end requires understanding why it occurred in so many places. .
Surprisingly, there is no well-received explanation, because this boom's ultimate causes are mostly psychological. .
Economists would rather talk about interest rates or unemployment statistics - factors that are concrete and knowable. .
Of course, these indicators do have a legitimate role to play in explaining housing markets, but they are simply not adequate to account for the recent booms. .
Three psychological causes stand out: first, a change in people's perceptions about the source of value in a changing world economy; second, increasing public faith in "glamour" cities with international name recognition; and third, the plain giddy dynamics of speculative bubbles. .
Each factor deserves greater attention if we are to understand current housing market conditions and discern future price trends. .
First, the world economy does look more chaotic than it did a decade ago. .
The crash in equity prices since 2000 in most countries has made financial assets look less secure, spurring a "flight to quality" - in this case, housing. .
Moreover, terrorism is now viewed as a problem for everyone, with major tragedies in Indonesia, Spain, and Russia. .
People feel safest investing in their homes, and there is little reason to expect imminent change. .
Fear and upward momentum in home prices go together. .
Second, the public's faith in glamorous international cities has increased with the explosive growth in global communications due to the Internet and the cell phone. .
Just as people increasingly admire international celebrities, so they believe that world famous centers of business, technology, and culture - whose names are household words to people everywhere - are uniquely valuable. .
As with fear of terrorism and suspicion of equities, geographical celebrity appears resilient, if not self-reinforcing: the more famous New York, Paris, and London get, the more glamorous they become. .
Third, and no less important, is the speculative contagion that underlies any bubble. .
The current boom has seen contagion within markets and across markets, as rising prices fuel popular excitement - and hence further price increases - in the same city, and then in other cities, even on the other side of the globe. .
People in Shanghai may not talk about London home prices, but Shanghai's opinion leaders know what is happening in London, and the boom there makes it seem plausible that there should be a boom in Shanghai, too. .
In contrast to the other two psychological causes, speculative contagion has a natural end. .
A speculative bubble, sustaining itself solely by reaction to price increases, cannot go on forever. .
So, where does this leave us? .
Two of the three psychological causes suggest continued upward momentum in housing prices, while the third suggests that the momentum will come to an end some day, but does not pinpoint when. .
I am betting that some high-flying glamour cities will continue to see decelerating growth in home prices - and eventually decreases. .
Historically, housing prices have shown a lot of momentum, and prices in all these cities are still going up at a brisk rate, though usually somewhat slower than a year or more ago. .
Based on extrapolation of growth trends, it looks safe to predict that prices will go up substantially in most of these places for another year or more, even as the rate of increase continues to decline. .
The psychological factors are more important for longer-term forecasts, beyond a year, where momentum no longer plays an important role. .
At this point, there is likely to be some downward instability in prices, because enthusiasm for investing in houses is likely to wane in line with declining price growth. .
Prices in glamour cities are likely to drop sharply the next time there is a serious recession, or if the local economy suffers a severe shock, or if interest rates rise too fast. .
Then, contagion within and across markets can work in a downward direction, propelling prices lower for years. .
Water for All .
This month, water once again takes center stage at the Fourth World Water Forum in Mexico City. .
It is an opportune moment: while much of the world's attention has been fixed on issues of energy supply and security, hundreds of millions of people in the developing world continue to see the supply and security of fresh water as equally, if not more, important. .
Surveys undertaken by the World Bank in developing countries show that, when poor people are asked to name the three most important concerns they face, "good health" is always mentioned. .
And a key determinant of whether they will have good health or not is access to clean water. .
More than a billion people around the world today do not. .
As a result, they are increasingly vulnerable to poor health. .
The World Bank estimates that by 2035, as many as three billion people, almost all of them in developing countries, could live under conditions of severe water stress, especially if they happen to live in Africa, the Middle East, or South Asia. .
This will cause obvious hardship, but it will also hold back the economic growth needed for millions of people to escape poverty. .
In Latin America, about 15% of the population -- roughly 76 million people -- do not have access to safe water, and 116 million people do not have access to sanitation services. .
The figures are worse in Africa and parts of Asia. .
This is a situation that few people in rich countries face. .
Generally, these countries' citizens enjoy services that provide for all water needs, from drinking to irrigation to sanitation. .
In addition, other water-related issues, such as the risks posed by flooding, have been reduced to manageable levels. .
Rich industrial countries have invested early and heavily in water infrastructure, institutions, and management capacities. .
The result, beyond the health benefits for all, has been a proven record of economic growth; one only has to look at investment in hydropower to see the positive impact of water management projects on many economies. .
Granted, rich countries have a certain advantage: they benefit from generally moderate climates, with regular rainfall and relatively low risks of drought and flooding. .
Even so, they are not immune to water-related disasters, as Hurricane Katrina's destruction of New Orleans taught us. .
But the impact of such events on poor countries is much greater. .
Extreme rainfall variations, floods, and droughts can have huge social and economic effects and result in the large-scale loss of life. .
The Gulf coast of Mexico and Central American countries has repeatedly experienced such tragedies, with poor communities the most vulnerable and the least able to cope. .
Ethiopia and Yemen are equally stark examples. .
Ethiopia's development potential is closely tied to seasonal rains, so high rainfall variation, together with lack of infrastructure, has undermined growth and perpetuated poverty. .
A single drought can cut growth potential by 10% over an extended period. .
Yemen, for its part, has no perennial surface water; its citizens depend entirely on rainfall, groundwater, and flash flooding. .
To move forward, developing countries need new water infrastructure and better management. .
Any approach must be tailored to the circumstances of each country and the needs of its people, but there is no fundamental constraint to designing water development investments that ensure that local communities and the environment gain tangible and early benefits. .
In some countries, new water infrastructure may mean canals, pumping stations, and levees. .
Still others might need deeper reservoirs, more modern filtration plants, or improved water transport schemes. .
These can all potentially be designed to improve and expand water supplies for power generation, irrigation, and household and industrial use, while providing security against droughts and protection from floods. .
The key to successful increased investment in water infrastructure is an equally increased investment in water institutions. .
Badly managed infrastructure will do little to improve peoples' health or support economic growth, so water development and water management must go hand in hand. .
Water infrastructure can and must be developed in parallel with sound institutions, good governance, great attention to the environment, and an equitable sharing of costs and benefits. .
A water investment policy that reduces the vulnerability of the poor and offers basic water security for all will require customized planning and an effective partnership of donor countries, developing country governments, the private sector, and local communities. .
Delegates to the World Water Forum will have ample opportunity to forge and/or strengthen these partnerships. .
If they succeed, the rewards for the world's poor will be immense. .
Germany's Five Shocks .
Over the last decade, Germany has been the slowest growing economy in the European Union, and Europe has been the slowest growing continent in the world. .
From 1995 to 2005, Germany will have grown by only 14.6%, while the old EU on average will have grown by 24%, the US by 39.9%, and the world economy by 45.6%. .
Why has Germany performed so badly? .
One theory, endorsed by the head of Germany's ruling Social Democratic Party, Franz Müntefering, is that Germany is already where the others still want to be. .
Slow German growth, he maintains, is a sign of natural convergence. .
But this theory is not convincing. .
Germany has recently been overtaken in terms of per capita income by several EU countries, including Ireland, the UK, the Netherlands, and France, and is still growing more slowly than all of them. .
Another, more plausible theory is that over the past fifteen years there have been various external challenges or shocks that have hit the country simultaneously. .
Rigid as it was, with an extensive welfare system and an over-regulated labor market, Germany was unable to react to these shocks and ran into trouble. .
This theory recalls that of the British historian Arnold Toynbee, according to which empires collapse because they are unable to react to external challenges. .
The first shock was intensified globalization, which brought a lot of new low-wage competition. .
Although globalization is a gradual process, it gained momentum when China decided to play the game. .
China is ten times the size of Japan, and Japan was not easy to deal with, either. .
German precision instruments and optical equipment, for example, lost their competitive edge when Japan entered the game. .
The second shock was EU integration, including the northern and southern enlargements. .
The dismantling of the EU's internal borders boosted each country's market size and brought about the predicted economies of scale. .
But this helped Europe's small countries more than the big ones, and it implied more competition for Germany, Europe's biggest economy. .
Twenty-five years after John Paul II left Poland for Rome, we Poles remain grateful to him for having helped us regain our freedom. .
It is good that John Paul II is among us. .
A world where everything changes needs a guardian of what remains the same. .
The Intervention Syndrome .
Kosovo is often held up as a test case for the concept of "humanitarian" intervention. .
But as Iraq spirals into chaos, diplomats and leaders everywhere are again asking themselves if it is ever appropriate for alliances of nations or the international community as a whole to intervene when a sovereign country appears unable or unwilling to defend its citizens from genocide, war crimes, or ethnic cleansing. .
At the center of this debate is the so-called doctrine of the "responsibility to protect." .
As the United Nations-appointed Ombudsperson in Kosovo for the past five years, I have had the unique opportunity to observe the aftereffects of that doctrine following NATO's intervention in the former Yugoslavia in 1999. .
Kosovo has subsequently become an international experiment in society building, led by the UN Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). .
Experiment is the right word here. .
And the entry of big-box stores into a community crushes long-established retailers, often traumatically transforming their character. .
Yes, to some extent, such is the price of progress. .
But the loss of aesthetics and community is not easily captured in simple income and price statistics. .
Big-box stores are not exactly attractive -- hence their name. .
If they continue their explosive growth over the next 20 years, will Americans someday come to regard their proliferation as a spectacular example of the failure to adopt region-wide blueprints for balanced growth? .
Indeed, many Europeans, and others, will view Holmes's video simulation of Wal-Mart's spread as a horror film. .
The French may have invented the hyper mart -- the forerunner of the big-box store -- but they never intended to let their growth go unchecked. .
The big question for Europeans is whether they can find ways to exploit some of the efficiency gains embodied by the Wal-Mart model without being overrun by it. .
For Americans, there is the additional question of what to do when the big-box store phenomenon has run its course. .
If so much of the US productivity edge really amounts to letting Wal-Mart and its big-box cousins run amok, what will happen after this source of growth tapers off? .
Indeed, Kosovo has become a Petri dish for international intervention. .
The US economy has many other strengths, including its superior financial system and leading position in high-tech capital goods, but the fact remains that America's advantage in these areas has so far not been nearly as striking as the Wal-Mart phenomenon. .
It is curious how many people seem to think that the US will grow faster than Europe and Japan over the next ten years simply because it has done so for the past ten years. .
Wal-Mart and its ilk are a central feature of the modern era of globalization. .
They are not quite the pandemic that their explosive growth pattern resembles, but nor is their emergence completely benign. .
Those who would aim to emulate US productivity trends must come to grips with how they feel about big-box stores sprouting across their countryside's, driving down wages and plowing under smaller-scale retailers. .
Americans, in turn, must think about where the proper balance lies between aesthetics, community, and low prices. .
Embracing Science .
Long-term economic progress comes mainly from the invention and spread of improved technologies. .
The scientific revolution was made possible by the printing press, the industrial revolution by the steam engine, and India's escape from famine by increased farm yields -- the so-called "Green Revolution." .
Today's era of globalization emerged with the spread of computers and the Internet. .
Having lived and worked long enough in Kosovo to see the outcome so far, I contend that such experiments require further research. .
Thus, when we seek solutions to some of the world's toughest problems, they, too, are likely to be found, at least in part, in new technologies that can resolve old and seemingly intractable problems. .
Consider poverty in Africa. .
Every conceivable explanation has been given, usually focusing on what Africans do wrong. .
But a visit to Africa's villages makes clear that the problems have more to do with the struggle for survival under difficult physical conditions than with any special problems that are unique to African societies. .
Africa's farmers produce roughly one-third or less food per hectare of farmland than their counterparts around the world, resulting in massive hunger, which is exacerbated by a heavy disease burden. .
Malaria poses a unique challenge, owing in large part to Africa's mosquito species, which are especially adept at transmitting the disease. .
Other tropical parasitic diseases imply similarly extraordinary burdens in Africa. .
Add the practical difficulties of broken-down roads and few cars and trucks, and economic isolation follows. .
So the challenges of survival are enormous. .
Yet practical solutions are at hand, because simple and low-cost technologies can address specific problems. .
Clearly, the need for international intervention in crises is often time-specific and a fairly swift response is frequently required. .
Low farm yields can be addressed through improved seed varieties specially adapted for African conditions, combined with technologies for replenishing soil and managing water. .
Malaria can be controlled through newly designed long-lasting mosquito nets and a new generation of effective medicines. .
Other tropical diseases also can be controlled, and practical technologies for safe drinking water can dramatically reduce diarrheal diseases. .
Mobile phones, local wireless Internet, and more paved roads could do much to break the economic isolation of Africa's villages. .
Donor countries incessantly ask Africans to change their trade policies, government institutions, public administration, and more. .
Some of these changes are important, but the role of the rich countries has been lopsided, focusing on everything except how to finance and introduce practical technologies to solve practical problems. .
The rich countries' mistakes wouldn't matter if African countries had enough money to adopt the needed technologies on their own, but Africa is so poor that it must get financial help to escape poverty. .
The development challenges in Africa are just one example of how tough societal problems can be addressed by the design and spread of improved technologies. .
The same will be true of how the world best addresses manmade climate change -- another of those seemingly intractable global problems. .
Right now, rich countries are changing the world's climate by emitting billions of tons of carbon dioxide each year from the use of coal, oil, and natural gas. .
However, apart from military factors, where such intervention is being considered, it is of vital importance to focus international policy discussion on the rapid deployment of a linked civilian and security presence. .
In future years, China and India also will make massive contributions to increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. .
Yet no country, rich or poor, is keen to cut its energy use, owing to concern that to do so would threaten jobs, incomes, and economic growth. .
New technologies will provide a key part of the solution. .
Already, "hybrid" automobiles, which combine gasoline and battery power, can roughly double fuel efficiency, cutting carbon dioxide emissions by half. .
Similarly, engineers have developed ways to capture the carbon dioxide that results from burning coal in power plants and store it safely underground. .
This new technology, called "carbon capture and sequestration," can cut by 80% the carbon dioxide emitted during the production of electricity. .
The costs appear relatively small. .
Consider also the depletion of ocean fisheries through over-fishing. .
Global demand for fish consumption is growing, and so, too, is the global capacity to catch fish, driving some species to the point of extinction. .
Improved aquaculture, in which fish are grown at manmade fishponds and reservoirs is still far from being a perfect technology, mainly for environmental reasons, yet it is enormously promising. .
This is especially true where human suffering is caused by communal conflict, as was the case in Kosovo. .
On a recent visit to Africa, a senior agricultural scientist said that in today's world, the scientist is closer than ever before to the farmer, but farther away than ever from the policymakers. .
An immediate deployment of an adequate civilian and security presence during the months immediately after the end of the 1999 NATO bombing campaign might well have provided suitable protective mechanisms against the backlash that allowed victims to become victimizers. .
NATO peacekeeping troops were not directed to stop the abductions, disappearances, retaliation killings, and massive property destruction by groups of ethnic Albanians, which led to a vast reverse ethnic cleansing of the non-Albanian (mainly Serb) population. .
As a result of this neglect, a noxious social and political residue pervades today's Kosovo. .
Instead of cooling communal conflict, interethnic hatred remains as heated as ever. .
In addition to the lack of an adequate civilian and security presence to reassure every community of its safety, the overall lack of legal mechanisms to deliver swift justice for crimes committed during and after the intervention created additional tension. .
So pervasive is this tension, in fact, that any chance of even beginning the much-needed reconciliation process must now be pushed far into the future. .
Similarly, in Kosovo the international community has devoted little time to helping former combatants contemplate their collective responsibility for atrocities, no matter how direct or indirect their personal involvement. .
Without such an effort, attempting to improve the situation is like building a house on a sand dune. .
This lack of foresight about and planning for the aftermath of armed intervention is not only dangerous to the people who have ostensibly been "saved"; it is counterproductive. .
Unless a humanitarian intervention is structured in such a way that it guarantees basic security, the underlying antagonisms that inspired the intervention in the first place will merely be reinforced, not diminished. .
So, six years after NATO's intervention, Kosovo seems as far from stability and social peace as ever. .
Despite the frequent assurances of UN authorities that Kosovo is on a path toward reconciliation and true home rule, NATO officials indicate that there are plans to maintain a long-term military presence in the province in order to "guarantee that the political process will be concluded successfully." .
This brings me to another key point: a workable exit strategy is just as important to the success of any future humanitarian intervention as the entry strategy. .
If an international intervention is to have any credible chance of success, clear criteria for what constitutes "success" are needed from the start. .
Only such clarity can allow for a proper end to international actors' engagement. .
In Kosovo, such clarity is and has been absent; as a result, NATO and the UN have no clear idea about when and how both should leave. .
Someone once rightly said that it is easy to bomb, but much harder to build; it is relatively easy to defeat a regime militarily, but it is far more difficult to create a solid, sustainable, civil society in its place. .
The UN General Assembly should keep this in mind as it starts to codify the doctrine of the "responsibility to protect." .
Central Europe's Fractious Right .
Is Eastern Europe's political pendulum about to run down? .
Across Central Europe since 1989, elections have oscillated between right and left. .
Is Hungary's slick young prime minister, Viktor Orban, poised to end all that? .
A ruthless program to absorb his political rivals on the right has helped Orban's FIDESZ party become nearly equal in size to his Socialist rivals on the left. .
Moreover, infighting among the Socialists has dented one of their biggest political advantages: the hard-headed discipline and political professionalism inherited from their Communist days. .
Premier Orban's semi-successful efforts to unify the right under the banner of FIDESZ are unique among Eastern Europe's fractured and fractious rightist parties. .
Since Communism's fall, center right parties in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia have suffered from disunity and a lack of vision. .
Despite the fact the region is still recovering from decades of communist mismanagement, the political right's fragmentation helped the political left, in some cases represented by former Communists, to win democratic elections regularly. .
Some problems faced by Central Europe's right are similar to those the political right faces elsewhere in Europe, where social democratic parties expropriated many formerly liberal ideas to seize a monopoly of the political center. .
In Central Europe this effect has been amplified by the fact that, regardless of ideological leanings, rulings parties have had to privatize the economy and, under pressure from the European Union, introduce reform measures that would, in a classical Western system, usually be undertaken by the political right. .
Leftist parties in various Central European countries, indeed, have often turned out to be more successful in reforming because they, paradoxically, have greater legitimacy in this respect. .
Many people believe that the Socialists would not privatize the economy or slash welfare systems if such measures were not absolutely necessary. .
The most serious problem of Central Europe's political right is a lack of identity. .
Although right-of-center politicians in Central European countries formally embrace traditional ideologies, for example, liberalism or conservatism, their electorates, unfamiliar with Western political philosophies, do not always understand the real meaning of those terms. .
In various surveys, significant segments of Central European electorates describe themselves as ``rightist,'' but years of communist paternalism pushed the region's political center of gravity firmly to the left. .
A person may describe him or herself as, for example, a liberal, yet at same time demand that the government continue subsidizing energy, education, or housing. .
Under the communist regimes, ideologies became totally instrumental. .
As during those years, many people now formally accept ideological labels but identify with them only as long as such an allegiance to a specific political current has tangible short-term benefits for them. .
One consequence of this cynical treatment of political ideologies is the wild swings in voters' preferences seen in various Central European countries. .
The problem of identity is made even worse by the fact that most Central European nations, where nation-building was retarded by Communism, easily succumb to nationalist sentiments that in turn are misused by some politicians. .
Although such politicians often describe themselves as ``rightist,'' their real policies, such as, for, example, those of former Slovak Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar, are in fact demagogic populist or authoritarian. .
The situation of the political right in each Central European country is also influenced by experiences that are rooted in history and tradition. .
Political developments in Czechoslovakia during the last 20 years of communism set the Czech Republic and Slovakia apart from both Poland and Hungary. .
While both the Polish and Hungarian communist parties experienced internal liberalization that allowed relatively large semi-official zones of activity outside communist control, Czechoslovakia after the Soviet-led invasion of 1968 became a rigid neo-Stalinist regime. .
When the communist regimes collapsed in 1989, the communist parties of Poland and Hungary transformed themselves into credible democratic-left parties that became formidable opponents of the newly emerging political right. .
No strong social democratic party in Czechoslovakia could emerge from the rigid Czechoslovak Communist Party. .
In the absence of a credible democratic left party, Czech center-right politicians had the upper hand, and were relatively united, until 1997. .
However, lack of a strong opposition corrupted the political right, which splintered into various groupings that cannot find a common language. .
In Slovakia, where nationalist sentiments were an important political factor after 1989, the political spectrum has not yet coalesced along standard right-left political axis. .
The main political battles occur between nationalist/populist forces, whose outlook have in essence been undemocratic, and forces that struggle for standard democracy. .
The threat of return to power by Meciar forced all democrats, leftist or rightist, into one camp. .
Even in this situation the political right has been quarrelsome, creating space for Meciar's possible return to power. .
Hungary's political right has suffered mainly from differences between conservative and populist forces on the one hand, and traditional, mainly urban, liberals on the other. .
Various rightist parties failed to decide whether the modus operandi on the political right should be traditional Western ideologies or a Hungarian brand of nationalist conservatism and populism. .
Although the current governing coalition, consisting of conservatives and populists, has been successful, the real reckoning for Hungary's right may still be yet to come. .
Poland's right poses the most difficult case. .
Its problems originate in the communist era, when a trade union movement, which under normal circumstances should stand to the political left, became the main anti-communist opposition. .
As a result, various political groups associated with the Solidarity trade union movement have, since Communism's fall, aspired to represent the political right, confusing the terms of political discourse. .
Christian-democratic parties, associated with the Catholic Church, and the liberals have been to some extent marginalized. .
The confusion has been made complete by the existence of relatively strong nationalist and populist parties that use the numerous Polish farmers as their electoral base. .
As in other postcommunist countries, the main beneficiary of such a lack of unity has been the democratic left. .
Wall-to-Wall Wal-Mart? .
Do you want to know which video clip will soon be scaring the daylights out of policymakers throughout the world? .
In a scenario that looks uncannily like the spread of a global pandemic, the economist Thomas Holmes has prepared a dynamic map simulation showing the spread of Wal-Mart stores throughout the United States. .
Starting at the epicenter in Bentonville, Arkansas, where Sam Walton opened his first store in 1962, giant boxy Wal-Mart stores have now multiplied to the point where the average American lives less than seven kilometers from an outlet. .
Interestingly, the video shows how the stores spread out like petals of a flower, ever thickening and expanding. .
Rather than jumping out to the coasts -- 80% of all Americans live within 80 kilometers of the Pacific or Atlantic oceans -- Wal-Marts have spread organically through an ever-expanding supply chain. .
Even though each new store takes away business from Wal-Mart stores established nearby, ever-improving supply efficiencies help maintain the chain's overall growth. .
Love them or hate them, what is undeniable is that Wal-Mart is the quintessential example of the costs and benefits of modern globalization. .
Consumers pay significantly less than at traditional outlets. .
For example, economists estimate that the food section of Wal-Mart charges 25% less than a typical large supermarket chain. .
The differences in price for many other consumer goods is even larger. .
Consider the following stunning fact: together with a few sister "big box" stores (Target, Best Buy, and Home Depot), Wal-Mart accounts for roughly 50% of America's much vaunted productivity growth edge over Europe during the last decade. .
Fifty percent! .
Similar advances in wholesaling supply chains account for another 25%! .
The notion that Americans have gotten better at everything while other rich countries have stood still is thus wildly misleading. .
The US productivity miracle and the emergence of Wal-Mart-style retailing are virtually synonymous. .
I have nothing against big box stores. .
They are an enormous boon to low-income consumers, partly compensating for the tepid wage growth that many of them have suffered during the past two decades. .
And I don't agree with friends of mine who turn their noses down at Wal-Mart stores, and claim never to have visited one. .
As a consumer, I think big-box stores are great. .
They have certainly been great for America's trading partners; Wal-Mart alone accounts for over 10% of all US imports from China. .
But I do have some reservations about the Wal-Mart model as a blueprint for global growth. .
First, there is the matter of its effect on low-wage workers and smaller-scale retailers. .
While completely legal, studies suggest that Wal-Mart's labor policies exploit regulatory loopholes that, for example, allow it to sidestep the burden of healthcare costs for many workers (Wal-Mart provides healthcare coverage to less than half its workers). .
Twenty-five years after John Paul II left Poland for Rome, we Poles remain grateful to him for having helped us regain our freedom. .
It is good that John Paul II is among us. .
A world where everything changes needs a guardian of what remains the same. .
The Intervention Syndrome .
Kosovo is often held up as a test case for the concept of "humanitarian" intervention. .
But as Iraq spirals into chaos, diplomats and leaders everywhere are again asking themselves if it is ever appropriate for alliances of nations or the international community as a whole to intervene when a sovereign country appears unable or unwilling to defend its citizens from genocide, war crimes, or ethnic cleansing. .
At the center of this debate is the so-called doctrine of the "responsibility to protect." .
As the United Nations-appointed Ombudsperson in Kosovo for the past five years, I have had the unique opportunity to observe the aftereffects of that doctrine following NATO's intervention in the former Yugoslavia in 1999. .
Kosovo has subsequently become an international experiment in society building, led by the UN Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). .
Experiment is the right word here. .
And the entry of big-box stores into a community crushes long-established retailers, often traumatically transforming their character. .
Yes, to some extent, such is the price of progress. .
But the loss of aesthetics and community is not easily captured in simple income and price statistics. .
Big-box stores are not exactly attractive -- hence their name. .
If they continue their explosive growth over the next 20 years, will Americans someday come to regard their proliferation as a spectacular example of the failure to adopt region-wide blueprints for balanced growth? .
Indeed, many Europeans, and others, will view Holmes's video simulation of Wal-Mart's spread as a horror film. .
The French may have invented the hyper mart -- the forerunner of the big-box store -- but they never intended to let their growth go unchecked. .
The big question for Europeans is whether they can find ways to exploit some of the efficiency gains embodied by the Wal-Mart model without being overrun by it. .
For Americans, there is the additional question of what to do when the big-box store phenomenon has run its course. .
If so much of the US productivity edge really amounts to letting Wal-Mart and its big-box cousins run amok, what will happen after this source of growth tapers off? .
Indeed, Kosovo has become a Petri dish for international intervention. .
The US economy has many other strengths, including its superior financial system and leading position in high-tech capital goods, but the fact remains that America's advantage in these areas has so far not been nearly as striking as the Wal-Mart phenomenon. .
It is curious how many people seem to think that the US will grow faster than Europe and Japan over the next ten years simply because it has done so for the past ten years. .
Wal-Mart and its ilk are a central feature of the modern era of globalization. .
They are not quite the pandemic that their explosive growth pattern resembles, but nor is their emergence completely benign. .
Those who would aim to emulate US productivity trends must come to grips with how they feel about big-box stores sprouting across their countryside's, driving down wages and plowing under smaller-scale retailers. .
Americans, in turn, must think about where the proper balance lies between aesthetics, community, and low prices. .
Embracing Science .
Long-term economic progress comes mainly from the invention and spread of improved technologies. .
The scientific revolution was made possible by the printing press, the industrial revolution by the steam engine, and India's escape from famine by increased farm yields -- the so-called "Green Revolution." .
Today's era of globalization emerged with the spread of computers and the Internet. .
Having lived and worked long enough in Kosovo to see the outcome so far, I contend that such experiments require further research. .
Thus, when we seek solutions to some of the world's toughest problems, they, too, are likely to be found, at least in part, in new technologies that can resolve old and seemingly intractable problems. .
Consider poverty in Africa. .
Every conceivable explanation has been given, usually focusing on what Africans do wrong. .
But a visit to Africa's villages makes clear that the problems have more to do with the struggle for survival under difficult physical conditions than with any special problems that are unique to African societies. .
Africa's farmers produce roughly one-third or less food per hectare of farmland than their counterparts around the world, resulting in massive hunger, which is exacerbated by a heavy disease burden. .
Malaria poses a unique challenge, owing in large part to Africa's mosquito species, which are especially adept at transmitting the disease. .
Other tropical parasitic diseases imply similarly extraordinary burdens in Africa. .
Add the practical difficulties of broken-down roads and few cars and trucks, and economic isolation follows. .
So the challenges of survival are enormous. .
Yet practical solutions are at hand, because simple and low-cost technologies can address specific problems. .
Clearly, the need for international intervention in crises is often time-specific and a fairly swift response is frequently required. .
Low farm yields can be addressed through improved seed varieties specially adapted for African conditions, combined with technologies for replenishing soil and managing water. .
Malaria can be controlled through newly designed long-lasting mosquito nets and a new generation of effective medicines. .
Other tropical diseases also can be controlled, and practical technologies for safe drinking water can dramatically reduce diarrheal diseases. .
Mobile phones, local wireless Internet, and more paved roads could do much to break the economic isolation of Africa's villages. .
Donor countries incessantly ask Africans to change their trade policies, government institutions, public administration, and more. .
Some of these changes are important, but the role of the rich countries has been lopsided, focusing on everything except how to finance and introduce practical technologies to solve practical problems. .
The rich countries' mistakes wouldn't matter if African countries had enough money to adopt the needed technologies on their own, but Africa is so poor that it must get financial help to escape poverty. .
The development challenges in Africa are just one example of how tough societal problems can be addressed by the design and spread of improved technologies. .
The same will be true of how the world best addresses manmade climate change -- another of those seemingly intractable global problems. .
Right now, rich countries are changing the world's climate by emitting billions of tons of carbon dioxide each year from the use of coal, oil, and natural gas. .
However, apart from military factors, where such intervention is being considered, it is of vital importance to focus international policy discussion on the rapid deployment of a linked civilian and security presence. .
In future years, China and India also will make massive contributions to increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. .
Yet no country, rich or poor, is keen to cut its energy use, owing to concern that to do so would threaten jobs, incomes, and economic growth. .
New technologies will provide a key part of the solution. .
Already, "hybrid" automobiles, which combine gasoline and battery power, can roughly double fuel efficiency, cutting carbon dioxide emissions by half. .
Similarly, engineers have developed ways to capture the carbon dioxide that results from burning coal in power plants and store it safely underground. .
This new technology, called "carbon capture and sequestration," can cut by 80% the carbon dioxide emitted during the production of electricity. .
The costs appear relatively small. .
Consider also the depletion of ocean fisheries through over-fishing. .
Global demand for fish consumption is growing, and so, too, is the global capacity to catch fish, driving some species to the point of extinction. .
Improved aquaculture, in which fish are grown at manmade fishponds and reservoirs is still far from being a perfect technology, mainly for environmental reasons, yet it is enormously promising. .
This is especially true where human suffering is caused by communal conflict, as was the case in Kosovo. .
On a recent visit to Africa, a senior agricultural scientist said that in today's world, the scientist is closer than ever before to the farmer, but farther away than ever from the policymakers. .
An immediate deployment of an adequate civilian and security presence during the months immediately after the end of the 1999 NATO bombing campaign might well have provided suitable protective mechanisms against the backlash that allowed victims to become victimizers. .
NATO peacekeeping troops were not directed to stop the abductions, disappearances, retaliation killings, and massive property destruction by groups of ethnic Albanians, which led to a vast reverse ethnic cleansing of the non-Albanian (mainly Serb) population. .
As a result of this neglect, a noxious social and political residue pervades today's Kosovo. .
Instead of cooling communal conflict, interethnic hatred remains as heated as ever. .
In addition to the lack of an adequate civilian and security presence to reassure every community of its safety, the overall lack of legal mechanisms to deliver swift justice for crimes committed during and after the intervention created additional tension. .
So pervasive is this tension, in fact, that any chance of even beginning the much-needed reconciliation process must now be pushed far into the future. .
Similarly, in Kosovo the international community has devoted little time to helping former combatants contemplate their collective responsibility for atrocities, no matter how direct or indirect their personal involvement. .
Without such an effort, attempting to improve the situation is like building a house on a sand dune. .
This lack of foresight about and planning for the aftermath of armed intervention is not only dangerous to the people who have ostensibly been "saved"; it is counterproductive. .
Unless a humanitarian intervention is structured in such a way that it guarantees basic security, the underlying antagonisms that inspired the intervention in the first place will merely be reinforced, not diminished. .
So, six years after NATO's intervention, Kosovo seems as far from stability and social peace as ever. .
Despite the frequent assurances of UN authorities that Kosovo is on a path toward reconciliation and true home rule, NATO officials indicate that there are plans to maintain a long-term military presence in the province in order to "guarantee that the political process will be concluded successfully." .
This brings me to another key point: a workable exit strategy is just as important to the success of any future humanitarian intervention as the entry strategy. .
If an international intervention is to have any credible chance of success, clear criteria for what constitutes "success" are needed from the start. .
Only such clarity can allow for a proper end to international actors' engagement. .
In Kosovo, such clarity is and has been absent; as a result, NATO and the UN have no clear idea about when and how both should leave. .
Someone once rightly said that it is easy to bomb, but much harder to build; it is relatively easy to defeat a regime militarily, but it is far more difficult to create a solid, sustainable, civil society in its place. .
The UN General Assembly should keep this in mind as it starts to codify the doctrine of the "responsibility to protect." .
Central Europe's Fractious Right .
Is Eastern Europe's political pendulum about to run down? .
Across Central Europe since 1989, elections have oscillated between right and left. .
Is Hungary's slick young prime minister, Viktor Orban, poised to end all that? .
A ruthless program to absorb his political rivals on the right has helped Orban's FIDESZ party become nearly equal in size to his Socialist rivals on the left. .
Moreover, infighting among the Socialists has dented one of their biggest political advantages: the hard-headed discipline and political professionalism inherited from their Communist days. .
Premier Orban's semi-successful efforts to unify the right under the banner of FIDESZ are unique among Eastern Europe's fractured and fractious rightist parties. .
Since Communism's fall, center right parties in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia have suffered from disunity and a lack of vision. .
Despite the fact the region is still recovering from decades of communist mismanagement, the political right's fragmentation helped the political left, in some cases represented by former Communists, to win democratic elections regularly. .
Some problems faced by Central Europe's right are similar to those the political right faces elsewhere in Europe, where social democratic parties expropriated many formerly liberal ideas to seize a monopoly of the political center. .
In Central Europe this effect has been amplified by the fact that, regardless of ideological leanings, rulings parties have had to privatize the economy and, under pressure from the European Union, introduce reform measures that would, in a classical Western system, usually be undertaken by the political right. .
Leftist parties in various Central European countries, indeed, have often turned out to be more successful in reforming because they, paradoxically, have greater legitimacy in this respect. .
Many people believe that the Socialists would not privatize the economy or slash welfare systems if such measures were not absolutely necessary. .
The most serious problem of Central Europe's political right is a lack of identity. .
Although right-of-center politicians in Central European countries formally embrace traditional ideologies, for example, liberalism or conservatism, their electorates, unfamiliar with Western political philosophies, do not always understand the real meaning of those terms. .
In various surveys, significant segments of Central European electorates describe themselves as ``rightist,'' but years of communist paternalism pushed the region's political center of gravity firmly to the left. .
A person may describe him or herself as, for example, a liberal, yet at same time demand that the government continue subsidizing energy, education, or housing. .
Under the communist regimes, ideologies became totally instrumental. .
As during those years, many people now formally accept ideological labels but identify with them only as long as such an allegiance to a specific political current has tangible short-term benefits for them. .
One consequence of this cynical treatment of political ideologies is the wild swings in voters' preferences seen in various Central European countries. .
The problem of identity is made even worse by the fact that most Central European nations, where nation-building was retarded by Communism, easily succumb to nationalist sentiments that in turn are misused by some politicians. .
Although such politicians often describe themselves as ``rightist,'' their real policies, such as, for, example, those of former Slovak Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar, are in fact demagogic populist or authoritarian. .
The situation of the political right in each Central European country is also influenced by experiences that are rooted in history and tradition. .
Political developments in Czechoslovakia during the last 20 years of communism set the Czech Republic and Slovakia apart from both Poland and Hungary. .
While both the Polish and Hungarian communist parties experienced internal liberalization that allowed relatively large semi-official zones of activity outside communist control, Czechoslovakia after the Soviet-led invasion of 1968 became a rigid neo-Stalinist regime. .
When the communist regimes collapsed in 1989, the communist parties of Poland and Hungary transformed themselves into credible democratic-left parties that became formidable opponents of the newly emerging political right. .
No strong social democratic party in Czechoslovakia could emerge from the rigid Czechoslovak Communist Party. .
In the absence of a credible democratic left party, Czech center-right politicians had the upper hand, and were relatively united, until 1997. .
However, lack of a strong opposition corrupted the political right, which splintered into various groupings that cannot find a common language. .
In Slovakia, where nationalist sentiments were an important political factor after 1989, the political spectrum has not yet coalesced along standard right-left political axis. .
The main political battles occur between nationalist/populist forces, whose outlook have in essence been undemocratic, and forces that struggle for standard democracy. .
The threat of return to power by Meciar forced all democrats, leftist or rightist, into one camp. .
Even in this situation the political right has been quarrelsome, creating space for Meciar's possible return to power. .
Hungary's political right has suffered mainly from differences between conservative and populist forces on the one hand, and traditional, mainly urban, liberals on the other. .
Various rightist parties failed to decide whether the modus operandi on the political right should be traditional Western ideologies or a Hungarian brand of nationalist conservatism and populism. .
Although the current governing coalition, consisting of conservatives and populists, has been successful, the real reckoning for Hungary's right may still be yet to come. .
Poland's right poses the most difficult case. .
Its problems originate in the communist era, when a trade union movement, which under normal circumstances should stand to the political left, became the main anti-communist opposition. .
As a result, various political groups associated with the Solidarity trade union movement have, since Communism's fall, aspired to represent the political right, confusing the terms of political discourse. .
Christian-democratic parties, associated with the Catholic Church, and the liberals have been to some extent marginalized. .
The confusion has been made complete by the existence of relatively strong nationalist and populist parties that use the numerous Polish farmers as their electoral base. .
As in other postcommunist countries, the main beneficiary of such a lack of unity has been the democratic left. .
Wall-to-Wall Wal-Mart? .
Do you want to know which video clip will soon be scaring the daylights out of policymakers throughout the world? .
In a scenario that looks uncannily like the spread of a global pandemic, the economist Thomas Holmes has prepared a dynamic map simulation showing the spread of Wal-Mart stores throughout the United States. .
Starting at the epicenter in Bentonville, Arkansas, where Sam Walton opened his first store in 1962, giant boxy Wal-Mart stores have now multiplied to the point where the average American lives less than seven kilometers from an outlet. .
Interestingly, the video shows how the stores spread out like petals of a flower, ever thickening and expanding. .
Rather than jumping out to the coasts -- 80% of all Americans live within 80 kilometers of the Pacific or Atlantic oceans -- Wal-Marts have spread organically through an ever-expanding supply chain. .
Even though each new store takes away business from Wal-Mart stores established nearby, ever-improving supply efficiencies help maintain the chain's overall growth. .
Love them or hate them, what is undeniable is that Wal-Mart is the quintessential example of the costs and benefits of modern globalization. .
Consumers pay significantly less than at traditional outlets. .
For example, economists estimate that the food section of Wal-Mart charges 25% less than a typical large supermarket chain. .
The differences in price for many other consumer goods is even larger. .
Consider the following stunning fact: together with a few sister "big box" stores (Target, Best Buy, and Home Depot), Wal-Mart accounts for roughly 50% of America's much vaunted productivity growth edge over Europe during the last decade. .
Fifty percent! .
Similar advances in wholesaling supply chains account for another 25%! .
The notion that Americans have gotten better at everything while other rich countries have stood still is thus wildly misleading. .
The US productivity miracle and the emergence of Wal-Mart-style retailing are virtually synonymous. .
I have nothing against big box stores. .
They are an enormous boon to low-income consumers, partly compensating for the tepid wage growth that many of them have suffered during the past two decades. .
And I don't agree with friends of mine who turn their noses down at Wal-Mart stores, and claim never to have visited one. .
As a consumer, I think big-box stores are great. .
They have certainly been great for America's trading partners; Wal-Mart alone accounts for over 10% of all US imports from China. .
But I do have some reservations about the Wal-Mart model as a blueprint for global growth. .
First, there is the matter of its effect on low-wage workers and smaller-scale retailers. .
While completely legal, studies suggest that Wal-Mart's labor policies exploit regulatory loopholes that, for example, allow it to sidestep the burden of healthcare costs for many workers (Wal-Mart provides healthcare coverage to less than half its workers). .
Twenty-five years after John Paul II left Poland for Rome, we Poles remain grateful to him for having helped us regain our freedom. .
It is good that John Paul II is among us. .
A world where everything changes needs a guardian of what remains the same. .
The Intervention Syndrome .
Kosovo is often held up as a test case for the concept of "humanitarian" intervention. .
But as Iraq spirals into chaos, diplomats and leaders everywhere are again asking themselves if it is ever appropriate for alliances of nations or the international community as a whole to intervene when a sovereign country appears unable or unwilling to defend its citizens from genocide, war crimes, or ethnic cleansing. .
At the center of this debate is the so-called doctrine of the "responsibility to protect." .
As the United Nations-appointed Ombudsperson in Kosovo for the past five years, I have had the unique opportunity to observe the aftereffects of that doctrine following NATO's intervention in the former Yugoslavia in 1999. .
Kosovo has subsequently become an international experiment in society building, led by the UN Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). .
Experiment is the right word here. .
And the entry of big-box stores into a community crushes long-established retailers, often traumatically transforming their character. .
Yes, to some extent, such is the price of progress. .
But the loss of aesthetics and community is not easily captured in simple income and price statistics. .
Big-box stores are not exactly attractive -- hence their name. .
If they continue their explosive growth over the next 20 years, will Americans someday come to regard their proliferation as a spectacular example of the failure to adopt region-wide blueprints for balanced growth? .
Indeed, many Europeans, and others, will view Holmes's video simulation of Wal-Mart's spread as a horror film. .
The French may have invented the hyper mart -- the forerunner of the big-box store -- but they never intended to let their growth go unchecked. .
The big question for Europeans is whether they can find ways to exploit some of the efficiency gains embodied by the Wal-Mart model without being overrun by it. .
For Americans, there is the additional question of what to do when the big-box store phenomenon has run its course. .
If so much of the US productivity edge really amounts to letting Wal-Mart and its big-box cousins run amok, what will happen after this source of growth tapers off? .
Indeed, Kosovo has become a Petri dish for international intervention. .
The US economy has many other strengths, including its superior financial system and leading position in high-tech capital goods, but the fact remains that America's advantage in these areas has so far not been nearly as striking as the Wal-Mart phenomenon. .
It is curious how many people seem to think that the US will grow faster than Europe and Japan over the next ten years simply because it has done so for the past ten years. .
Wal-Mart and its ilk are a central feature of the modern era of globalization. .
They are not quite the pandemic that their explosive growth pattern resembles, but nor is their emergence completely benign. .
Those who would aim to emulate US productivity trends must come to grips with how they feel about big-box stores sprouting across their countryside's, driving down wages and plowing under smaller-scale retailers. .
Americans, in turn, must think about where the proper balance lies between aesthetics, community, and low prices. .
Embracing Science .
Long-term economic progress comes mainly from the invention and spread of improved technologies. .
The scientific revolution was made possible by the printing press, the industrial revolution by the steam engine, and India's escape from famine by increased farm yields -- the so-called "Green Revolution." .
Today's era of globalization emerged with the spread of computers and the Internet. .
Having lived and worked long enough in Kosovo to see the outcome so far, I contend that such experiments require further research. .
Thus, when we seek solutions to some of the world's toughest problems, they, too, are likely to be found, at least in part, in new technologies that can resolve old and seemingly intractable problems. .
Consider poverty in Africa. .
Every conceivable explanation has been given, usually focusing on what Africans do wrong. .
But a visit to Africa's villages makes clear that the problems have more to do with the struggle for survival under difficult physical conditions than with any special problems that are unique to African societies. .
Africa's farmers produce roughly one-third or less food per hectare of farmland than their counterparts around the world, resulting in massive hunger, which is exacerbated by a heavy disease burden. .
Malaria poses a unique challenge, owing in large part to Africa's mosquito species, which are especially adept at transmitting the disease. .
Other tropical parasitic diseases imply similarly extraordinary burdens in Africa. .
Add the practical difficulties of broken-down roads and few cars and trucks, and economic isolation follows. .
So the challenges of survival are enormous. .
Yet practical solutions are at hand, because simple and low-cost technologies can address specific problems. .
Clearly, the need for international intervention in crises is often time-specific and a fairly swift response is frequently required. .
Low farm yields can be addressed through improved seed varieties specially adapted for African conditions, combined with technologies for replenishing soil and managing water. .
Malaria can be controlled through newly designed long-lasting mosquito nets and a new generation of effective medicines. .
Other tropical diseases also can be controlled, and practical technologies for safe drinking water can dramatically reduce diarrheal diseases. .
Mobile phones, local wireless Internet, and more paved roads could do much to break the economic isolation of Africa's villages. .
Donor countries incessantly ask Africans to change their trade policies, government institutions, public administration, and more. .
Some of these changes are important, but the role of the rich countries has been lopsided, focusing on everything except how to finance and introduce practical technologies to solve practical problems. .
The rich countries' mistakes wouldn't matter if African countries had enough money to adopt the needed technologies on their own, but Africa is so poor that it must get financial help to escape poverty. .
The development challenges in Africa are just one example of how tough societal problems can be addressed by the design and spread of improved technologies. .
The same will be true of how the world best addresses manmade climate change -- another of those seemingly intractable global problems. .
Right now, rich countries are changing the world's climate by emitting billions of tons of carbon dioxide each year from the use of coal, oil, and natural gas. .
However, apart from military factors, where such intervention is being considered, it is of vital importance to focus international policy discussion on the rapid deployment of a linked civilian and security presence. .
In future years, China and India also will make massive contributions to increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. .
Yet no country, rich or poor, is keen to cut its energy use, owing to concern that to do so would threaten jobs, incomes, and economic growth. .
New technologies will provide a key part of the solution. .
Already, "hybrid" automobiles, which combine gasoline and battery power, can roughly double fuel efficiency, cutting carbon dioxide emissions by half. .
Similarly, engineers have developed ways to capture the carbon dioxide that results from burning coal in power plants and store it safely underground. .
This new technology, called "carbon capture and sequestration," can cut by 80% the carbon dioxide emitted during the production of electricity. .
The costs appear relatively small. .
Consider also the depletion of ocean fisheries through over-fishing. .
Global demand for fish consumption is growing, and so, too, is the global capacity to catch fish, driving some species to the point of extinction. .
Improved aquaculture, in which fish are grown at manmade fishponds and reservoirs is still far from being a perfect technology, mainly for environmental reasons, yet it is enormously promising. .
This is especially true where human suffering is caused by communal conflict, as was the case in Kosovo. .
On a recent visit to Africa, a senior agricultural scientist said that in today's world, the scientist is closer than ever before to the farmer, but farther away than ever from the policymakers. .
An immediate deployment of an adequate civilian and security presence during the months immediately after the end of the 1999 NATO bombing campaign might well have provided suitable protective mechanisms against the backlash that allowed victims to become victimizers. .
NATO peacekeeping troops were not directed to stop the abductions, disappearances, retaliation killings, and massive property destruction by groups of ethnic Albanians, which led to a vast reverse ethnic cleansing of the non-Albanian (mainly Serb) population. .
As a result of this neglect, a noxious social and political residue pervades today's Kosovo. .
Instead of cooling communal conflict, interethnic hatred remains as heated as ever. .
In addition to the lack of an adequate civilian and security presence to reassure every community of its safety, the overall lack of legal mechanisms to deliver swift justice for crimes committed during and after the intervention created additional tension. .
So pervasive is this tension, in fact, that any chance of even beginning the much-needed reconciliation process must now be pushed far into the future. .
Similarly, in Kosovo the international community has devoted little time to helping former combatants contemplate their collective responsibility for atrocities, no matter how direct or indirect their personal involvement. .
Without such an effort, attempting to improve the situation is like building a house on a sand dune. .
This lack of foresight about and planning for the aftermath of armed intervention is not only dangerous to the people who have ostensibly been "saved"; it is counterproductive. .
Unless a humanitarian intervention is structured in such a way that it guarantees basic security, the underlying antagonisms that inspired the intervention in the first place will merely be reinforced, not diminished. .
So, six years after NATO's intervention, Kosovo seems as far from stability and social peace as ever. .
Despite the frequent assurances of UN authorities that Kosovo is on a path toward reconciliation and true home rule, NATO officials indicate that there are plans to maintain a long-term military presence in the province in order to "guarantee that the political process will be concluded successfully." .
This brings me to another key point: a workable exit strategy is just as important to the success of any future humanitarian intervention as the entry strategy. .
If an international intervention is to have any credible chance of success, clear criteria for what constitutes "success" are needed from the start. .
Only such clarity can allow for a proper end to international actors' engagement. .
In Kosovo, such clarity is and has been absent; as a result, NATO and the UN have no clear idea about when and how both should leave. .
Someone once rightly said that it is easy to bomb, but much harder to build; it is relatively easy to defeat a regime militarily, but it is far more difficult to create a solid, sustainable, civil society in its place. .
The UN General Assembly should keep this in mind as it starts to codify the doctrine of the "responsibility to protect." .
Central Europe's Fractious Right .
Is Eastern Europe's political pendulum about to run down? .
Across Central Europe since 1989, elections have oscillated between right and left. .
Is Hungary's slick young prime minister, Viktor Orban, poised to end all that? .
A ruthless program to absorb his political rivals on the right has helped Orban's FIDESZ party become nearly equal in size to his Socialist rivals on the left. .
Moreover, infighting among the Socialists has dented one of their biggest political advantages: the hard-headed discipline and political professionalism inherited from their Communist days. .
Premier Orban's semi-successful efforts to unify the right under the banner of FIDESZ are unique among Eastern Europe's fractured and fractious rightist parties. .
Since Communism's fall, center right parties in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia have suffered from disunity and a lack of vision. .
Despite the fact the region is still recovering from decades of communist mismanagement, the political right's fragmentation helped the political left, in some cases represented by former Communists, to win democratic elections regularly. .
Some problems faced by Central Europe's right are similar to those the political right faces elsewhere in Europe, where social democratic parties expropriated many formerly liberal ideas to seize a monopoly of the political center. .
In Central Europe this effect has been amplified by the fact that, regardless of ideological leanings, rulings parties have had to privatize the economy and, under pressure from the European Union, introduce reform measures that would, in a classical Western system, usually be undertaken by the political right. .
Leftist parties in various Central European countries, indeed, have often turned out to be more successful in reforming because they, paradoxically, have greater legitimacy in this respect. .
Many people believe that the Socialists would not privatize the economy or slash welfare systems if such measures were not absolutely necessary. .
The most serious problem of Central Europe's political right is a lack of identity. .
Although right-of-center politicians in Central European countries formally embrace traditional ideologies, for example, liberalism or conservatism, their electorates, unfamiliar with Western political philosophies, do not always understand the real meaning of those terms. .
In various surveys, significant segments of Central European electorates describe themselves as ``rightist,'' but years of communist paternalism pushed the region's political center of gravity firmly to the left. .
A person may describe him or herself as, for example, a liberal, yet at same time demand that the government continue subsidizing energy, education, or housing. .
Under the communist regimes, ideologies became totally instrumental. .
As during those years, many people now formally accept ideological labels but identify with them only as long as such an allegiance to a specific political current has tangible short-term benefits for them. .
One consequence of this cynical treatment of political ideologies is the wild swings in voters' preferences seen in various Central European countries. .
The problem of identity is made even worse by the fact that most Central European nations, where nation-building was retarded by Communism, easily succumb to nationalist sentiments that in turn are misused by some politicians. .
Although such politicians often describe themselves as ``rightist,'' their real policies, such as, for, example, those of former Slovak Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar, are in fact demagogic populist or authoritarian. .
The situation of the political right in each Central European country is also influenced by experiences that are rooted in history and tradition. .
Political developments in Czechoslovakia during the last 20 years of communism set the Czech Republic and Slovakia apart from both Poland and Hungary. .
While both the Polish and Hungarian communist parties experienced internal liberalization that allowed relatively large semi-official zones of activity outside communist control, Czechoslovakia after the Soviet-led invasion of 1968 became a rigid neo-Stalinist regime. .
When the communist regimes collapsed in 1989, the communist parties of Poland and Hungary transformed themselves into credible democratic-left parties that became formidable opponents of the newly emerging political right. .
No strong social democratic party in Czechoslovakia could emerge from the rigid Czechoslovak Communist Party. .
In the absence of a credible democratic left party, Czech center-right politicians had the upper hand, and were relatively united, until 1997. .
However, lack of a strong opposition corrupted the political right, which splintered into various groupings that cannot find a common language. .
In Slovakia, where nationalist sentiments were an important political factor after 1989, the political spectrum has not yet coalesced along standard right-left political axis. .
The main political battles occur between nationalist/populist forces, whose outlook have in essence been undemocratic, and forces that struggle for standard democracy. .
The threat of return to power by Meciar forced all democrats, leftist or rightist, into one camp. .
Even in this situation the political right has been quarrelsome, creating space for Meciar's possible return to power. .
Hungary's political right has suffered mainly from differences between conservative and populist forces on the one hand, and traditional, mainly urban, liberals on the other. .
Various rightist parties failed to decide whether the modus operandi on the political right should be traditional Western ideologies or a Hungarian brand of nationalist conservatism and populism. .
Although the current governing coalition, consisting of conservatives and populists, has been successful, the real reckoning for Hungary's right may still be yet to come. .
Poland's right poses the most difficult case. .
Its problems originate in the communist era, when a trade union movement, which under normal circumstances should stand to the political left, became the main anti-communist opposition. .
As a result, various political groups associated with the Solidarity trade union movement have, since Communism's fall, aspired to represent the political right, confusing the terms of political discourse. .
Christian-democratic parties, associated with the Catholic Church, and the liberals have been to some extent marginalized. .
The confusion has been made complete by the existence of relatively strong nationalist and populist parties that use the numerous Polish farmers as their electoral base. .
As in other postcommunist countries, the main beneficiary of such a lack of unity has been the democratic left. .
Wall-to-Wall Wal-Mart? .
Do you want to know which video clip will soon be scaring the daylights out of policymakers throughout the world? .
In a scenario that looks uncannily like the spread of a global pandemic, the economist Thomas Holmes has prepared a dynamic map simulation showing the spread of Wal-Mart stores throughout the United States. .
Starting at the epicenter in Bentonville, Arkansas, where Sam Walton opened his first store in 1962, giant boxy Wal-Mart stores have now multiplied to the point where the average American lives less than seven kilometers from an outlet. .
Interestingly, the video shows how the stores spread out like petals of a flower, ever thickening and expanding. .
Rather than jumping out to the coasts -- 80% of all Americans live within 80 kilometers of the Pacific or Atlantic oceans -- Wal-Marts have spread organically through an ever-expanding supply chain. .
Even though each new store takes away business from Wal-Mart stores established nearby, ever-improving supply efficiencies help maintain the chain's overall growth. .
Love them or hate them, what is undeniable is that Wal-Mart is the quintessential example of the costs and benefits of modern globalization. .
Consumers pay significantly less than at traditional outlets. .
For example, economists estimate that the food section of Wal-Mart charges 25% less than a typical large supermarket chain. .
The differences in price for many other consumer goods is even larger. .
Consider the following stunning fact: together with a few sister "big box" stores (Target, Best Buy, and Home Depot), Wal-Mart accounts for roughly 50% of America's much vaunted productivity growth edge over Europe during the last decade. .
Fifty percent! .
Similar advances in wholesaling supply chains account for another 25%! .
The notion that Americans have gotten better at everything while other rich countries have stood still is thus wildly misleading. .
The US productivity miracle and the emergence of Wal-Mart-style retailing are virtually synonymous. .
I have nothing against big box stores. .
They are an enormous boon to low-income consumers, partly compensating for the tepid wage growth that many of them have suffered during the past two decades. .
And I don't agree with friends of mine who turn their noses down at Wal-Mart stores, and claim never to have visited one. .
As a consumer, I think big-box stores are great. .
They have certainly been great for America's trading partners; Wal-Mart alone accounts for over 10% of all US imports from China. .
But I do have some reservations about the Wal-Mart model as a blueprint for global growth. .
First, there is the matter of its effect on low-wage workers and smaller-scale retailers. .
While completely legal, studies suggest that Wal-Mart's labor policies exploit regulatory loopholes that, for example, allow it to sidestep the burden of healthcare costs for many workers (Wal-Mart provides healthcare coverage to less than half its workers). .
Another Balkan High Noon .
With the world focused on Iraq, North Korea, and a possible clash with Iran over nuclear weapons, Kosovo has fallen off the radar screen. .
That inattention will end soon; a decision about the province's fate is looming. .
The United States and its European friends have repeatedly stated their intent to make the difficult decision before the end of the year on whether to separate Kosovo from Serbia. .
This decision -- crucial to the future of an unstable region -- will test Western determination and unity. .
Negotiations this year in Vienna, brokered by the United Nations, showed that an agreed settlement between Serbia and Kosovo on "final status" will not happen. .
Talks continue, but, as UN negotiator and former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari diplomatically told the Security Council, they are effectively dead. .
No Serbian leader will agree to Kosovo's independence, because nationalism remains the dominant political force in the country. .
Indeed, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, the apostle of Serbian nationalism, has been trying in every way to undermine Kosovo's interim government. .
He is rushing to hold a national referendum this month on a new constitution without serious parliamentary debate or the usual public education. .
The Palestinian leader, Abu Mazen, recognizes this, but the question is whether he can deliver. .
The Palestinian leadership could also start down the difficult road of telling the refugees that -- contrary to almost 50 years of Palestinian propaganda -- they will not return to Israel, but will have to be settled in the West Bank and Gaza, the areas that will become part of the eventual Palestinian state. .
In an ideal world, conflicts end by agreements and treaties. .
But in the real world -- and Cyprus, Bosnia, and Kosovo may be examples -- stabilization and the slow de-escalation of violence can sometimes achieve the same end, even without formal agreement. .
In the absence of plausible alternatives, one hopes that this will also be the case for Israelis and Palestinians. .
A World Restored? .
BERLIN: Like old battle horses feeling young as the bugle sounds, Cold War strategists are feeling the adrenalin mount as missile defense becomes front page news. .
True, the defense against missiles which Bill Clinton (reluctantly) and George W. Bush (enthusiastically) are proposing -- with massive support from America's Congress -- is different from Ronald Reagan's Star Wars dream of twenty years ago: NMD is supposed to catch only a modest number of warheads, not provide complete protection against enemy missiles. .
Nevertheless, the issue rekindles old debates over deterrence, mutual assured destruction and nuclear arms control, and revives the rivalry between the nuclear powers just when nuclear weapons had lost much of their relevance. .
Amazingly, debate is heating up even though it is uncertain that NMD will work. .
The main purpose of his new constitution is its preamble, which enshrines Kosovo as an inalienable part of Serbia. .
Even if it does work, it will be ten to fifteen years, possibly longer, before NMD is operational. .
So tempers are rising over something which, if and when it happens in the distant future, may or may not have much impact. .
Normally cautious governments are positioning themselves now as if the future were around the corner. .
What explains this odd behavior? .
Not blind faith in technology. .
After all, the history of missile defense is a tale of technology constantly disappointing its advocates in and out of government. .
No one in his right mind can assume that something never achieved before, namely destroying a small number of warheads in flight, will happen over night. .
Of the three tests so far conducted, one failed almost, two entirely, which is why President Clinton left the matter to his successor. .
If President Bush, as he has hinted, now favors a different design, it will take even more time to develop the architecture and devise a test program. .
Nobody can be sure that it will work either. .
Kosovo's ethnic Albanians have proclaimed that they will not accept any tie to Serbia, no matter how tenuous. .
Governments are worried now, not because of capabilities, but because of America's real or imagined intentions. .
While Americans claim that NMD is not directed against anyone, that all the US wants is to protect its citizens against states like Iraq or North Korea, almost everyone else thinks differently: Russians fear that America wants to cement its military superiority (and Russia's inferiority) forever; the Chinese are concerned that NMD signals American readiness to help Taiwan remain independent; Europeans worry that America's plans invite tensions with Russia and may separate the US from Europe. .
Because political intentions, not technical capabilities matter, NMD creates problems now: it pushes Russia into confrontation, heightens Chinese nervousness, and underpins a European sense of estrangement from the US. .
Damage is done from the word go while the end of the road remains obscured. .
Inflating this political damage is the fact that, thirty years ago, the US and the then Soviet Union renounced effective defense against strategic nuclear missiles. .
Normally, a US defense project in its infancy would not cause the excitement NMD generates. .
But the 1972 ABM Treaty prohibits, for the indefinite future, systems to protect either country against such nuclear attack. .
As the US proceeds with NMD, it will either have to violate the Treaty or give six months notice to quit, something both signatories are entitled to do if they feel their vital security interests demand it. .
In the eyes of many, that would amount to America opting out of the structure of nuclear arms control built in the latter part of the Cold War. .
The Bush Administration argues that, because the Cold War is over, the formal disappearance of the ABM Treaty would not mean a loss of nuclear stability. .
Throughout the 1990's, they virtually opted out of Serbian-run Kosovo by creating parallel institutions. .
But stability is as much a matter of political perceptions as of technical calculations. .
By limiting strategic missile defense, the old treaty provides a certain predictability of deterrence for all nuclear weapon states. .
Its disappearance would affect all other arms control agreements. .
Russia threatens to scrap all of them once the US leaves the ABM-Treaty. .
While this threat lacks credibility (it would harm Russian interests most) it has a certain logic. .
The main question NMD poses is not how to prepare for a future world of missile defense but how to dampen today's political concerns. .
Such efforts are getting discretely underway. .
Legal experts in Washington suggest that modest preparations for building missile and radar sites do not violate the ABM-Treaty and so do not yet require a US notice to quit. .
For now, the Bush Administration will await the outcome of tests before deciding. .
Both Moscow and Washington hint at possible deep cuts in their offensive nuclear arsenals. .
Their forced mass exodus in 1999 and NATO's subsequent intervention, which ended Serbia's rule and established a quasi-state under UN administration, has made anything other than independence intolerable. .
Skeptical European allies are being mollified by US assurances of close consultation. .
The most important of confidence-building measures, a modification of the ABM-Treaty to allow for limited missile defense, is being explored. .
Russia's early "nyet" may not be the last word. .
So political turmoil with Russia and Europe might be calmed. .
But what about China? .
In contrast to Europe and Russia, China is not party to an alliance (as is Europe) or to a network of arms control treaties through which political solutions can evolve (like Russia), factors that contribute to Asian instabilities and Chinese sensitivity. .
Here confidence can only be built through the approach taken by the US to China. .
Regrettably, there are no indications yet that the problem is recognized in Washington as a serious one. .
All this comes as a disappointment to old Cold War strategists. .
While brushing up the vocabulary and abbreviations of the age of superpower deterrence, they discover that such a world has gone. .
Some time over the next month or two, the Balkan Contact Group — the US, UK, France, Germany, Italy, and Russia -- will consider Ahtisaari's recommendations on Kosovo's final status and possibly propose a solution to the Security Council, which must make the final decision. .
Missile defense is not a threat to US-Russian strategic stability; its mishandling is a threat to political predictability. .
In public, all Contact Group members have tried to leave the question of Kosovo's final status open, but informally the US and some of its allies have told the two parties that they will propose independence this year. .
Some members of the Security Council -- particularly Russia and China -- are opposed to or skeptical of an imposed settlement, and few governments favor dividing up another country's territory, however compelling the circumstances. .
Whether the Security Council will approve independence largely depends on averting a Russian veto, which will require considerable diplomatic effort. .
The nature of the independence bestowed is also important. .
An independent Kosovo must be secured and its minorities protected. .
Northern Kosovo, now largely under Belgrade's control, must not be partitioned off in all but name. .
In the interest of reducing the blow to Serbia, the Security Council must avoid granting independence in ways that are so contorted that the new state cannot effectively function. .
If the Security Council fails to reach a decision on final status, it will produce a GRAVE situation: Kosovo would declare independence unilaterally, and all nations would have to make up their mind whether or not to recognize the new state. .
If that happens, it is likely that the Serbs of North Kosovo would declare their own independence. .
At a minimum, Serbia would campaign strongly against recognition. .
In fact, Serbia's government is already trying to persuade the West to postpone a decision until mid-2007. .
It claims that if Kosovo is granted independence, the ultranationalist Radical Party will come to power in the next elections, and believes that holding elections as early as this year will cause the Contact Group to delay a proposal to the Security Council. .
Moreover, the government has encouraged the leaders of Bosnia's Republika Srpska to threaten to hold their own referendum on separation from a still fragile Bosnia. .
And they continue to push &#45;&#45; unsuccessfully &#45;&#45; for Ahtisaari's removal in order to prolong the Vienna talks. .
The timing of the constitutional referendum appears to be a part of this delaying strategy. .
Some hope that postponement will stimulate violence in Kosovo and further encourage Western reconsideration of independence. .
That tactic may be working. .
Many European Union countries are worried about the implications of taking away a country's territory, as well as the impact of Kosovo's independence on Serbian democracy. .
Given Serbia's political instability, they question the harm of a short-term postponement -- albeit mostly self-inflicted. .
But delay only offers more room for Kostunica to find ways to make a Security Council decision more difficult. .
The West must ignore Belgrade's siren song. .
Serbian politics will be chaotic and unstable for the foreseeable future, and Serbian politicians will attempt to present this as an excuse to avoid facing the loss of Kosovo. .
Likewise, there will be problems establishing ties between Serbia and Kosovo under any circumstances. .
But failure to proceed definitively now on Kosovo's final status will produce a worse Balkan situation, one that blocks Serbia's move toward the West and ultimate membership in the EU, condemns Kosovo's ethnic minorities to dangerous ambiguity, and imperils fragile states like Bosnia and Macedonia. .
No realistic solution exists for Kosovo but independence. .
If Serbia wants to join the West, it must not forsake that opportunity by trapping itself in its nationalist past. .
South Korea's Dangerous New Dawn .
North Korea's decision to expel UN atomic energy inspectors is but another reason to view Roh Moo Hyun's election as South Korea's president two weeks ago as an historical watershed. .
The beginning of his term not only coincides with one of the most dangerous episodes on the Korean peninsula in decades, but his presidency will also test South Korea's relations with the US to a degree that has not been seen for many years. .
Roh's victory over Lee Hoi Chang signifies a generational shift in Korean politics, with the young determined to gain a freer hand in Korea's relations with the US. .
Indeed, generational differences were the deciding factor in the race, replacing the regional sentiments that dominated every presidential race before this one. .
According to one report, over 60% of people in their twenties and thirties voted for Roh to produce a margin of 2.3% in this first two-man, head-to-head presidential race in 31 years. .
Roh's populist and nationalist stance will be swiftly and sorely tested by reality when he assumes power in February. .
But couple the generational changeover thaty put him in office with a strong popular desire for continued engagement with North Korea--notwithstanding North Korea's growing nuclear brinkmanship--and the recipe is complete for disputes with the US. .
Roh, a self-made man who passed a bar examination without going to college and law school, succeeded in convincing voters that he would usher in a new brand of politics reflecting South Korea's growing wealth and middle class sentiments, thereby sweeping away insider-dominated politics, regional bickering, and factional struggles. .
His style and rhetoric projected the fresh (for Korea!) image of a common man committed to eliminating the ossified networks of cronyism and corruption. .
For the first time in modern Korean history, the presidential campaign actually debated the central issues facing the country, rather than focussing on parties and personalities. .
Candidate Roh called for a new relationship between South Korea and the US, one based on the principle of independence and equality. .
For example, he said that he would not kow-tow to the US or visit Washington just for the sake of a photo opportunity He also promised to continue President Kim Dae Jung's "Sunshine policy" of engagement with the North. .
Remarkably, Roh won the election despite North Korea's decision to reactivate nuclear reactors that had been frozen since 1994. .
A few years ago this would have doomed Roh's candidacy. .
That he overcame this obstacle without changing his stance on engaging North Korea means that times have radically changed. .
A popular yearning for change, not the security situation, is now the overriding concern of ordinary Koreans. .
Roh's campaign also took advantage of a rising tide of anti-Americanism. .
The acquittal by a US military court of two American soldiers who accidentally killed two Korean schoolgirls with their armored car last June triggered street demonstrations across the country. .
Although President George W. Bush apologized twice for the deaths of the girls, demands continue to escalate for changing the Status of Force Agreement (SOFA) that governs the legal treatment of American troops stationed in South Korea. .
Ordinary Koreans insist that US soldiers who commit crimes should be tried in Korean courts. .
This expression of wounded national pride was enabled by South Korea's tremendous performance in the World Cup football tournament last summer, which helped convince ordinary Koreans that their country was fully grown up--and thus might be able to stand on its own without the presence of 37,000 US troops. .
Indeed, many ordinary people now view the US presence, and not North Korea's communist regime, as the biggest obstacle to unification. .
According to a recent poll, only 54.8% of Koreans now support the stationing of American troops in the country, while 31.7% oppose it. .
These sentiments will form part of the diplomatic test shaping Roh's presidency from the start, for he must re-engineer relations with America at the same time that the Bush administration is fretting about North Korea's nuclear ambitions and its role in spreading weapons of mass destruction to rogue states. .
For now, Korean voters--apparently impervious to the threat that North Korea's nuclear weapons poses--support Roh's policy of maintaining dialogue and economic exchange with the North. .
Under President Roh, South Korea's domestic politics and relations with the US and North Korea will require an almost total overhaul. .
Can he walk the tightrope of maintaining security on the peninsula, keeping America engaged, and retaining the support of the voters who elected him? .
Reconciling those goals would test even the most experienced and cynical of politicians, so it is anyone's guess as to whether President Roh can succeed. .
Failure, however, offers such a horrific prospect that no one can possibly hope for it. .
The Unilateral Road to Peace .
In the next three weeks, the Israeli army will do something unprecedented: instead of defending the country against external enemies or terrorism, it will evacuate -- by force if necessary -- 9,000 Israelis from their homes. .
Israel's unilateral withdrawal is the outcome of a deep political shift that has been caused by two somewhat contradictory convictions that have characterized Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's policies since 2003: first, that the US-initiated "road map" is going nowhere and, second, that the status quo is untenable. .
Certainly, according to Sharon's thinking, there is no future for 9,000 Jewish settlers living among 1.2 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. .
Hence, in the absence of negotiations, a unilateral withdrawal is the only meaningful step towards de-escalation and stabilization. .
This policy has deeply divided Israel: the settlers -- mostly, but not exclusively religious -- feel betrayed by Sharon, "The Father of the Settlements." .
It is now the Israeli left that, however reluctantly, realizes that Sharon's new pragmatism may be the first step in the right direction. .
Like de Gaulle in Algeria, Sharon has reshuffled the cards of Israel's politics. .
The last weeks have seen massive demonstrations, some of them verging on violence; many of the settlers have declared that they will not obey government orders to evacuate. .
The army and the police have mobilized almost 50,000 troops to carry out evictions. .
This forcible approach is traumatic not only for the settlers, but also for many other Israelis. .
Only the next days and weeks will tell whether the evacuation proceeds peacefully or not. .
In the meantime, Sharon has paid heavily for his policies. .
Two right-wing parties have left his ruling coalition, he has lost his majority within his own Likud Party, and his finance minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, has quit his government. .
Only by bringing Shimon Peres's Labor Party into his cabinet did Sharon manage to retain his parliamentary majority. .
The question, of course, is what will happen after the Gaza disengagement. .
Many governments were initially skeptical about disengagement, but realized that -- as the Washington saying goes -- "this is the only game in town." .
Among them, as well as among the Palestinians, one hears the hope that after the Gaza withdrawal, it will be possible to return to the road map and to resume negotiations leading to a final agreement between Israel and the Palestinians. .
This is a major mistake. .
While motivated by the best of intentions, the hope of reviving the road map is out of touch with reality. .
Future negotiations will have to deal with the ultimate borders between Israel and Palestine, the fate of 200,000 Jewish settlers in the West Bank, the status of Jerusalem, and with the problem of the 1947-48 Palestinian refugees. .
On all of these issues, the gulf between the Israeli and Palestinian positions has not narrowed since the failed negotiations at Camp David in 2000, while fear and distrust have increased. .
To attempt negotiations under these circumstances would not only be an exercise in futility, but may merely deepen alienation and suspicion on both sides. .
The failure of the Annan Plan for Cyprus suggests that good intentions are not enough -- and the disagreements in Cyprus were miniscule compared to what divides Israelis and Palestinians. .
So what can be done? .
Probably the only rational way to proceed would be to acknowledge that unilateral steps on both sides can still further the cause of de-escalation and ultimate reconciliation. .
On the Israeli side, further disengagement from dozens of isolated and small settlements on the West Bank, entailing the evacuation of between 20,000 and 30,000 settlers, may be politically feasible and would give the Palestinians a contiguous territory on the West Bank. .
On the Palestinian side, consolidation of the Palestinian Authority's control over a dozen security services and militias would be an important step. .
Government stipends for tuition and for new and enlarged universities can play a big role, as can investment in computers and information technology in schools and communities. .
The social agenda and the technology agenda are not independent of each other. .
Both call upon Latin American societies to invest more in their people, so that Latin Americans can join the cutting edge of global productivity. .
If these investments reach all parts of Latin America, rich and poor, the region's prospects will brighten enormously. .
Are Housing Prices a House of Cards? .
The first big city to boom was London, starting around 1996. .
Boom mentality spread to Los Angeles, New York, and Sydney around 1997, to Paris in 1998, to Miami, Moscow, and Shanghai in 2001, and Vancouver around 2002. .
These and other cities have been booming pretty much ever since; prices in most are up at least 50% in real terms since 2000. .
This has been a big windfall to homeowners, but has hurt anyone planning to buy. .
Now growth in home prices is weakening in some of these cities. .
Think of Nokia, the mobile phone maker. .
Due to the economies of scale that the common market made possible, Nokia was able to exploit its inventions fully, while Germany's Siemens recently decided to give up on the mobile phone market. .
The third shock was the euro, which has induced a rapid convergence of long-term interest rates, which in some countries had been five to seven percentage points above the German level. .
Freed from exchange-rate risk, international investors no longer demanded a risk premium from these countries and were willing to provide funds to all of them under the same favorable conditions that previously had been reserved for Germany. .
This is good for Europe, because it helps improve the allocation of capital and stimulates growth by transporting German savings to the remote and previously disadvantaged regions of the euro zone. .
But it is of doubtful benefit to German workers who also would have liked to cooperate with that capital. .
The fourth shock was eastern EU enlargement, which has brought extraordinary chances for trade and investment in the east, but has also brought massive low-wage competition. .
On average, wage costs in the ten countries that joined the EU in 2004 are only 14% of the West German level. .
Low-wage competition has led to substantial outsourcing and off-shoring activities that have kept German firms competitive by reducing their demand for domestic labor. .
As neither Germany's unions nor its welfare state would accept falling wages, the result was higher unemployment and slower growth. .
The rate of price growth in London and New York slowed sharply over the past year, to only about a 1% real increase in the second quarter of 2004. .
The fifth shock was German unification, which is a failure in economic terms. .
GDP per working-age person in East Germany had been 61% of the West German level in 1996, but it is now only 59%. .
The slow growth of the eastern part of the country has pulled down the Germany-wide average, while the enormous demand for public funds in the east has increased public debt. .
The weak fiscal position has in turn undermined investors' confidence, with obvious implications for economic growth. .
All five shocks constitute historical developments that are good for the world as a whole, but problematic for Germany. .
In order for the country to meet the challenges and to continue to grow, it would have to make its labor markets flexible. .
Only if wages adjust downward to accommodate the new international environment can German workers become competitive again, so that the country returns to a higher employment level, exploiting its human capital up to the capacity constraint. .
The new government that voters will most likely elect in September will be confronted with the difficult task of confronting Germans with reality and pushing through the necessary reforms. .
Only then will we know whether Germany can meet the Toynbeean challenge it is facing. .
Lessons from the Tsunami .
In Sydney, home prices actually fell in the second quarter. .
There are many lessons that emerge from the tsunami that brought such devastation and loss of life to Asia. .
It demonstrated the power of globalization, as television brought vivid pictures of the destruction to homes around the world. .
Indeed, it is at times like this that the world truly does seem like a global village. .
Of course, it seemed to take somewhat longer for news of the extent of the disaster to reach the Crawford, Texas, ranch of President Bush. .
But, in the end, he decided to interrupt his vacation and offer amounts of aid that were successively revised upwards, in a global competition which promised to benefit those who were desperate for help. .
America's aid still appeared niggardly when compared with the amounts offered by countries with a fraction of America's economic wealth. .
Lightly populated Australia offered more than twice America's assistance, Japan promised almost 50% more, and Europe pledged more than five times as much. .
This led many observers to reflect on the fact that the world's richest country was in general the most miserly in foreign assistance -- all the more so in comparison to the amount it spends on war and defense. .
The disaster was international, so it was appropriate that the United Nations take the lead in coordinating the relief effort. .
Unfortunately, in an effort that was widely seen as another attempt to undermine multilateralism, the US tried to lead a "core group" driving the assistance program, ignoring ongoing efforts within the region and at the UN. .
Has the boom ended? .
Whatever America's motive, it later wisely decided to join the UN effort. .
The Bush administration's face-saving rhetoric that it had rushed to push together the core group in the absence of other efforts was quietly let to pass. .
The response of some countries within the region was truly impressive, showing how far they had come in establishing efficient and effective governments. .
Myriad details were addressed: Thailand flew ambassadors to the affected part of the country to help attend to the needs of their citizens, helped those who lost their money and passports return home, provided health care for the injured, set up systems to identify bodies, and dealt with the difficulties posed by shortages of body bags and the lack of cold storage facilities. .
Countries, like Thailand, that felt that they could handle the finances on their own asked that assistance be directed to others. .
They did ask one thing: a reduction of tariff barriers and greater access to markets abroad. .
They didn't want a handout, only a chance to earn income. .
The response, at least at the time of this column's writing, has mostly been deafening silence. .
On the other hand, the G-7 made a truly important contribution in offering debt relief. .
This is especially important for Indonesia, which must service a debt of $132 billion (of which $70 billion is owed to public creditors or guaranteed by government agencies). .
Will no other cities benefit? .
Even without the tsunami, this debt burden would have been an enormous hindrance to the country's development as it finally recovers from the aftermath of the 1997 financial crisis. .
Indeed, there is a compelling case to be made for Indonesian debt relief in any case, given that much of the debt was incurred in loans to the corrupt Suharto government. .
Lenders knew, or should have known, that not all of the money was going to help Indonesian development. .
Moreover, some of the debt was incurred as part of the 1997-1998 crisis, which was aggravated and deepened by IMF-imposed policies. .
No one pretends that we can prevent or alter the forces of nature. .
Rather, we have to learn to cope with them. .
There are now calls for improved tsunami early warning systems. .
But in one area, global warming, we have already received an early warning. .
Most countries have recognized this, coming together in Rio and Kyoto to do something about it—not enough, but the Kyoto protocol was intended only as a start. .
Sadly, global warming will likely destroy some of the same countries ravaged by the tsunami. .
Worse still, could the mood in housing markets soon lead prices in downward? .
Low lying islands like the Maldives will become submerged. .
No one predicted this boom, so predicting its end is risky. .
Housing prices have shown tremendous upward momentum in the face of previous warnings that the party is over. .
Any prediction concerning the boom's end requires understanding why it occurred in so many places. .
Surprisingly, there is no well-received explanation, because this boom's ultimate causes are mostly psychological. .
Economists would rather talk about interest rates or unemployment statistics - factors that are concrete and knowable. .
Of course, these indicators do have a legitimate role to play in explaining housing markets, but they are simply not adequate to account for the recent booms. .
Three psychological causes stand out: first, a change in people's perceptions about the source of value in a changing world economy; second, increasing public faith in "glamour" cities with international name recognition; and third, the plain giddy dynamics of speculative bubbles. .
Each factor deserves greater attention if we are to understand current housing market conditions and discern future price trends. .
First, the world economy does look more chaotic than it did a decade ago. .
The crash in equity prices since 2000 in most countries has made financial assets look less secure, spurring a "flight to quality" - in this case, housing. .
Moreover, terrorism is now viewed as a problem for everyone, with major tragedies in Indonesia, Spain, and Russia. .
People feel safest investing in their homes, and there is little reason to expect imminent change. .
Fear and upward momentum in home prices go together. .
Second, the public's faith in glamorous international cities has increased with the explosive growth in global communications due to the Internet and the cell phone. .
Just as people increasingly admire international celebrities, so they believe that world famous centers of business, technology, and culture - whose names are household words to people everywhere - are uniquely valuable. .
As with fear of terrorism and suspicion of equities, geographical celebrity appears resilient, if not self-reinforcing: the more famous New York, Paris, and London get, the more glamorous they become. .
Third, and no less important, is the speculative contagion that underlies any bubble. .
The current boom has seen contagion within markets and across markets, as rising prices fuel popular excitement - and hence further price increases - in the same city, and then in other cities, even on the other side of the globe. .
People in Shanghai may not talk about London home prices, but Shanghai's opinion leaders know what is happening in London, and the boom there makes it seem plausible that there should be a boom in Shanghai, too. .
In contrast to the other two psychological causes, speculative contagion has a natural end. .
A speculative bubble, sustaining itself solely by reaction to price increases, cannot go on forever. .
So, where does this leave us? .
Two of the three psychological causes suggest continued upward momentum in housing prices, while the third suggests that the momentum will come to an end some day, but does not pinpoint when. .
I am betting that some high-flying glamour cities will continue to see decelerating growth in home prices - and eventually decreases. .
Historically, housing prices have shown a lot of momentum, and prices in all these cities are still going up at a brisk rate, though usually somewhat slower than a year or more ago. .
Based on extrapolation of growth trends, it looks safe to predict that prices will go up substantially in most of these places for another year or more, even as the rate of increase continues to decline. .
The psychological factors are more important for longer-term forecasts, beyond a year, where momentum no longer plays an important role. .
At this point, there is likely to be some downward instability in prices, because enthusiasm for investing in houses is likely to wane in line with declining price growth. .
Prices in glamour cities are likely to drop sharply the next time there is a serious recession, or if the local economy suffers a severe shock, or if interest rates rise too fast. .
Then, contagion within and across markets can work in a downward direction, propelling prices lower for years. .
Water for All .
This month, water once again takes center stage at the Fourth World Water Forum in Mexico City. .
It is an opportune moment: while much of the world's attention has been fixed on issues of energy supply and security, hundreds of millions of people in the developing world continue to see the supply and security of fresh water as equally, if not more, important. .
Surveys undertaken by the World Bank in developing countries show that, when poor people are asked to name the three most important concerns they face, "good health" is always mentioned. .
And a key determinant of whether they will have good health or not is access to clean water. .
More than a billion people around the world today do not. .
As a result, they are increasingly vulnerable to poor health. .
The World Bank estimates that by 2035, as many as three billion people, almost all of them in developing countries, could live under conditions of severe water stress, especially if they happen to live in Africa, the Middle East, or South Asia. .
This will cause obvious hardship, but it will also hold back the economic growth needed for millions of people to escape poverty. .
In Latin America, about 15% of the population -- roughly 76 million people -- do not have access to safe water, and 116 million people do not have access to sanitation services. .
The figures are worse in Africa and parts of Asia. .
This is a situation that few people in rich countries face. .
Generally, these countries' citizens enjoy services that provide for all water needs, from drinking to irrigation to sanitation. .
In addition, other water-related issues, such as the risks posed by flooding, have been reduced to manageable levels. .
Rich industrial countries have invested early and heavily in water infrastructure, institutions, and management capacities. .
The result, beyond the health benefits for all, has been a proven record of economic growth; one only has to look at investment in hydropower to see the positive impact of water management projects on many economies. .
Granted, rich countries have a certain advantage: they benefit from generally moderate climates, with regular rainfall and relatively low risks of drought and flooding. .
Even so, they are not immune to water-related disasters, as Hurricane Katrina's destruction of New Orleans taught us. .
But the impact of such events on poor countries is much greater. .
Extreme rainfall variations, floods, and droughts can have huge social and economic effects and result in the large-scale loss of life. .
The Gulf coast of Mexico and Central American countries has repeatedly experienced such tragedies, with poor communities the most vulnerable and the least able to cope. .
Ethiopia and Yemen are equally stark examples. .
Ethiopia's development potential is closely tied to seasonal rains, so high rainfall variation, together with lack of infrastructure, has undermined growth and perpetuated poverty. .
A single drought can cut growth potential by 10% over an extended period. .
Yemen, for its part, has no perennial surface water; its citizens depend entirely on rainfall, groundwater, and flash flooding. .
To move forward, developing countries need new water infrastructure and better management. .
Any approach must be tailored to the circumstances of each country and the needs of its people, but there is no fundamental constraint to designing water development investments that ensure that local communities and the environment gain tangible and early benefits. .
In some countries, new water infrastructure may mean canals, pumping stations, and levees. .
Still others might need deeper reservoirs, more modern filtration plants, or improved water transport schemes. .
These can all potentially be designed to improve and expand water supplies for power generation, irrigation, and household and industrial use, while providing security against droughts and protection from floods. .
The key to successful increased investment in water infrastructure is an equally increased investment in water institutions. .
Badly managed infrastructure will do little to improve peoples' health or support economic growth, so water development and water management must go hand in hand. .
Water infrastructure can and must be developed in parallel with sound institutions, good governance, great attention to the environment, and an equitable sharing of costs and benefits. .
A water investment policy that reduces the vulnerability of the poor and offers basic water security for all will require customized planning and an effective partnership of donor countries, developing country governments, the private sector, and local communities. .
Delegates to the World Water Forum will have ample opportunity to forge and/or strengthen these partnerships. .
If they succeed, the rewards for the world's poor will be immense. .
Germany's Five Shocks .
Over the last decade, Germany has been the slowest growing economy in the European Union, and Europe has been the slowest growing continent in the world. .
From 1995 to 2005, Germany will have grown by only 14.6%, while the old EU on average will have grown by 24%, the US by 39.9%, and the world economy by 45.6%. .
Why has Germany performed so badly? .
One theory, endorsed by the head of Germany's ruling Social Democratic Party, Franz Müntefering, is that Germany is already where the others still want to be. .
Slow German growth, he maintains, is a sign of natural convergence. .
But this theory is not convincing. .
Germany has recently been overtaken in terms of per capita income by several EU countries, including Ireland, the UK, the Netherlands, and France, and is still growing more slowly than all of them. .
Another, more plausible theory is that over the past fifteen years there have been various external challenges or shocks that have hit the country simultaneously. .
Rigid as it was, with an extensive welfare system and an over-regulated labor market, Germany was unable to react to these shocks and ran into trouble. .
This theory recalls that of the British historian Arnold Toynbee, according to which empires collapse because they are unable to react to external challenges. .
The first shock was intensified globalization, which brought a lot of new low-wage competition. .
Although globalization is a gradual process, it gained momentum when China decided to play the game. .
China is ten times the size of Japan, and Japan was not easy to deal with, either. .
German precision instruments and optical equipment, for example, lost their competitive edge when Japan entered the game. .
The second shock was EU integration, including the northern and southern enlargements. .
The dismantling of the EU's internal borders boosted each country's market size and brought about the predicted economies of scale. .
But this helped Europe's small countries more than the big ones, and it implied more competition for Germany, Europe's biggest economy. .
Another Balkan High Noon .
With the world focused on Iraq, North Korea, and a possible clash with Iran over nuclear weapons, Kosovo has fallen off the radar screen. .
That inattention will end soon; a decision about the province's fate is looming. .
The United States and its European friends have repeatedly stated their intent to make the difficult decision before the end of the year on whether to separate Kosovo from Serbia. .
This decision -- crucial to the future of an unstable region -- will test Western determination and unity. .
Negotiations this year in Vienna, brokered by the United Nations, showed that an agreed settlement between Serbia and Kosovo on "final status" will not happen. .
Talks continue, but, as UN negotiator and former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari diplomatically told the Security Council, they are effectively dead. .
No Serbian leader will agree to Kosovo's independence, because nationalism remains the dominant political force in the country. .
Indeed, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, the apostle of Serbian nationalism, has been trying in every way to undermine Kosovo's interim government. .
He is rushing to hold a national referendum this month on a new constitution without serious parliamentary debate or the usual public education. .
The Palestinian leader, Abu Mazen, recognizes this, but the question is whether he can deliver. .
The Palestinian leadership could also start down the difficult road of telling the refugees that -- contrary to almost 50 years of Palestinian propaganda -- they will not return to Israel, but will have to be settled in the West Bank and Gaza, the areas that will become part of the eventual Palestinian state. .
In an ideal world, conflicts end by agreements and treaties. .
But in the real world -- and Cyprus, Bosnia, and Kosovo may be examples -- stabilization and the slow de-escalation of violence can sometimes achieve the same end, even without formal agreement. .
In the absence of plausible alternatives, one hopes that this will also be the case for Israelis and Palestinians. .
A World Restored? .
BERLIN: Like old battle horses feeling young as the bugle sounds, Cold War strategists are feeling the adrenalin mount as missile defense becomes front page news. .
True, the defense against missiles which Bill Clinton (reluctantly) and George W. Bush (enthusiastically) are proposing -- with massive support from America's Congress -- is different from Ronald Reagan's Star Wars dream of twenty years ago: NMD is supposed to catch only a modest number of warheads, not provide complete protection against enemy missiles. .
Nevertheless, the issue rekindles old debates over deterrence, mutual assured destruction and nuclear arms control, and revives the rivalry between the nuclear powers just when nuclear weapons had lost much of their relevance. .
Amazingly, debate is heating up even though it is uncertain that NMD will work. .
The main purpose of his new constitution is its preamble, which enshrines Kosovo as an inalienable part of Serbia. .
Even if it does work, it will be ten to fifteen years, possibly longer, before NMD is operational. .
So tempers are rising over something which, if and when it happens in the distant future, may or may not have much impact. .
Normally cautious governments are positioning themselves now as if the future were around the corner. .
What explains this odd behavior? .
Not blind faith in technology. .
After all, the history of missile defense is a tale of technology constantly disappointing its advocates in and out of government. .
No one in his right mind can assume that something never achieved before, namely destroying a small number of warheads in flight, will happen over night. .
Of the three tests so far conducted, one failed almost, two entirely, which is why President Clinton left the matter to his successor. .
If President Bush, as he has hinted, now favors a different design, it will take even more time to develop the architecture and devise a test program. .
Nobody can be sure that it will work either. .
Kosovo's ethnic Albanians have proclaimed that they will not accept any tie to Serbia, no matter how tenuous. .
Governments are worried now, not because of capabilities, but because of America's real or imagined intentions. .
While Americans claim that NMD is not directed against anyone, that all the US wants is to protect its citizens against states like Iraq or North Korea, almost everyone else thinks differently: Russians fear that America wants to cement its military superiority (and Russia's inferiority) forever; the Chinese are concerned that NMD signals American readiness to help Taiwan remain independent; Europeans worry that America's plans invite tensions with Russia and may separate the US from Europe. .
Because political intentions, not technical capabilities matter, NMD creates problems now: it pushes Russia into confrontation, heightens Chinese nervousness, and underpins a European sense of estrangement from the US. .
Damage is done from the word go while the end of the road remains obscured. .
Inflating this political damage is the fact that, thirty years ago, the US and the then Soviet Union renounced effective defense against strategic nuclear missiles. .
Normally, a US defense project in its infancy would not cause the excitement NMD generates. .
But the 1972 ABM Treaty prohibits, for the indefinite future, systems to protect either country against such nuclear attack. .
As the US proceeds with NMD, it will either have to violate the Treaty or give six months notice to quit, something both signatories are entitled to do if they feel their vital security interests demand it. .
In the eyes of many, that would amount to America opting out of the structure of nuclear arms control built in the latter part of the Cold War. .
The Bush Administration argues that, because the Cold War is over, the formal disappearance of the ABM Treaty would not mean a loss of nuclear stability. .
Throughout the 1990's, they virtually opted out of Serbian-run Kosovo by creating parallel institutions. .
But stability is as much a matter of political perceptions as of technical calculations. .
By limiting strategic missile defense, the old treaty provides a certain predictability of deterrence for all nuclear weapon states. .
Its disappearance would affect all other arms control agreements. .
Russia threatens to scrap all of them once the US leaves the ABM-Treaty. .
While this threat lacks credibility (it would harm Russian interests most) it has a certain logic. .
The main question NMD poses is not how to prepare for a future world of missile defense but how to dampen today's political concerns. .
Such efforts are getting discretely underway. .
Legal experts in Washington suggest that modest preparations for building missile and radar sites do not violate the ABM-Treaty and so do not yet require a US notice to quit. .
For now, the Bush Administration will await the outcome of tests before deciding. .
Both Moscow and Washington hint at possible deep cuts in their offensive nuclear arsenals. .
Their forced mass exodus in 1999 and NATO's subsequent intervention, which ended Serbia's rule and established a quasi-state under UN administration, has made anything other than independence intolerable. .
Skeptical European allies are being mollified by US assurances of close consultation. .
The most important of confidence-building measures, a modification of the ABM-Treaty to allow for limited missile defense, is being explored. .
Russia's early "nyet" may not be the last word. .
So political turmoil with Russia and Europe might be calmed. .
But what about China? .
In contrast to Europe and Russia, China is not party to an alliance (as is Europe) or to a network of arms control treaties through which political solutions can evolve (like Russia), factors that contribute to Asian instabilities and Chinese sensitivity. .
Here confidence can only be built through the approach taken by the US to China. .
Regrettably, there are no indications yet that the problem is recognized in Washington as a serious one. .
All this comes as a disappointment to old Cold War strategists. .
While brushing up the vocabulary and abbreviations of the age of superpower deterrence, they discover that such a world has gone. .
Some time over the next month or two, the Balkan Contact Group — the US, UK, France, Germany, Italy, and Russia -- will consider Ahtisaari's recommendations on Kosovo's final status and possibly propose a solution to the Security Council, which must make the final decision. .
Missile defense is not a threat to US-Russian strategic stability; its mishandling is a threat to political predictability. .
In public, all Contact Group members have tried to leave the question of Kosovo's final status open, but informally the US and some of its allies have told the two parties that they will propose independence this year. .
Some members of the Security Council -- particularly Russia and China -- are opposed to or skeptical of an imposed settlement, and few governments favor dividing up another country's territory, however compelling the circumstances. .
Whether the Security Council will approve independence largely depends on averting a Russian veto, which will require considerable diplomatic effort. .
The nature of the independence bestowed is also important. .
An independent Kosovo must be secured and its minorities protected. .
Northern Kosovo, now largely under Belgrade's control, must not be partitioned off in all but name. .
In the interest of reducing the blow to Serbia, the Security Council must avoid granting independence in ways that are so contorted that the new state cannot effectively function. .
If the Security Council fails to reach a decision on final status, it will produce a GRAVE situation: Kosovo would declare independence unilaterally, and all nations would have to make up their mind whether or not to recognize the new state. .
If that happens, it is likely that the Serbs of North Kosovo would declare their own independence. .
At a minimum, Serbia would campaign strongly against recognition. .
In fact, Serbia's government is already trying to persuade the West to postpone a decision until mid-2007. .
It claims that if Kosovo is granted independence, the ultranationalist Radical Party will come to power in the next elections, and believes that holding elections as early as this year will cause the Contact Group to delay a proposal to the Security Council. .
Moreover, the government has encouraged the leaders of Bosnia's Republika Srpska to threaten to hold their own referendum on separation from a still fragile Bosnia. .
And they continue to push &#45;&#45; unsuccessfully &#45;&#45; for Ahtisaari's removal in order to prolong the Vienna talks. .
The timing of the constitutional referendum appears to be a part of this delaying strategy. .
Some hope that postponement will stimulate violence in Kosovo and further encourage Western reconsideration of independence. .
That tactic may be working. .
Many European Union countries are worried about the implications of taking away a country's territory, as well as the impact of Kosovo's independence on Serbian democracy. .
Given Serbia's political instability, they question the harm of a short-term postponement -- albeit mostly self-inflicted. .
But delay only offers more room for Kostunica to find ways to make a Security Council decision more difficult. .
The West must ignore Belgrade's siren song. .
Serbian politics will be chaotic and unstable for the foreseeable future, and Serbian politicians will attempt to present this as an excuse to avoid facing the loss of Kosovo. .
Likewise, there will be problems establishing ties between Serbia and Kosovo under any circumstances. .
But failure to proceed definitively now on Kosovo's final status will produce a worse Balkan situation, one that blocks Serbia's move toward the West and ultimate membership in the EU, condemns Kosovo's ethnic minorities to dangerous ambiguity, and imperils fragile states like Bosnia and Macedonia. .
No realistic solution exists for Kosovo but independence. .
If Serbia wants to join the West, it must not forsake that opportunity by trapping itself in its nationalist past. .
South Korea's Dangerous New Dawn .
North Korea's decision to expel UN atomic energy inspectors is but another reason to view Roh Moo Hyun's election as South Korea's president two weeks ago as an historical watershed. .
The beginning of his term not only coincides with one of the most dangerous episodes on the Korean peninsula in decades, but his presidency will also test South Korea's relations with the US to a degree that has not been seen for many years. .
Roh's victory over Lee Hoi Chang signifies a generational shift in Korean politics, with the young determined to gain a freer hand in Korea's relations with the US. .
Indeed, generational differences were the deciding factor in the race, replacing the regional sentiments that dominated every presidential race before this one. .
According to one report, over 60% of people in their twenties and thirties voted for Roh to produce a margin of 2.3% in this first two-man, head-to-head presidential race in 31 years. .
Roh's populist and nationalist stance will be swiftly and sorely tested by reality when he assumes power in February. .
But couple the generational changeover thaty put him in office with a strong popular desire for continued engagement with North Korea--notwithstanding North Korea's growing nuclear brinkmanship--and the recipe is complete for disputes with the US. .
Roh, a self-made man who passed a bar examination without going to college and law school, succeeded in convincing voters that he would usher in a new brand of politics reflecting South Korea's growing wealth and middle class sentiments, thereby sweeping away insider-dominated politics, regional bickering, and factional struggles. .
His style and rhetoric projected the fresh (for Korea!) image of a common man committed to eliminating the ossified networks of cronyism and corruption. .
For the first time in modern Korean history, the presidential campaign actually debated the central issues facing the country, rather than focussing on parties and personalities. .
Candidate Roh called for a new relationship between South Korea and the US, one based on the principle of independence and equality. .
For example, he said that he would not kow-tow to the US or visit Washington just for the sake of a photo opportunity He also promised to continue President Kim Dae Jung's "Sunshine policy" of engagement with the North. .
Remarkably, Roh won the election despite North Korea's decision to reactivate nuclear reactors that had been frozen since 1994. .
A few years ago this would have doomed Roh's candidacy. .
That he overcame this obstacle without changing his stance on engaging North Korea means that times have radically changed. .
A popular yearning for change, not the security situation, is now the overriding concern of ordinary Koreans. .
Roh's campaign also took advantage of a rising tide of anti-Americanism. .
The acquittal by a US military court of two American soldiers who accidentally killed two Korean schoolgirls with their armored car last June triggered street demonstrations across the country. .
Although President George W. Bush apologized twice for the deaths of the girls, demands continue to escalate for changing the Status of Force Agreement (SOFA) that governs the legal treatment of American troops stationed in South Korea. .
Ordinary Koreans insist that US soldiers who commit crimes should be tried in Korean courts. .
This expression of wounded national pride was enabled by South Korea's tremendous performance in the World Cup football tournament last summer, which helped convince ordinary Koreans that their country was fully grown up--and thus might be able to stand on its own without the presence of 37,000 US troops. .
Indeed, many ordinary people now view the US presence, and not North Korea's communist regime, as the biggest obstacle to unification. .
According to a recent poll, only 54.8% of Koreans now support the stationing of American troops in the country, while 31.7% oppose it. .
These sentiments will form part of the diplomatic test shaping Roh's presidency from the start, for he must re-engineer relations with America at the same time that the Bush administration is fretting about North Korea's nuclear ambitions and its role in spreading weapons of mass destruction to rogue states. .
For now, Korean voters--apparently impervious to the threat that North Korea's nuclear weapons poses--support Roh's policy of maintaining dialogue and economic exchange with the North. .
Under President Roh, South Korea's domestic politics and relations with the US and North Korea will require an almost total overhaul. .
Can he walk the tightrope of maintaining security on the peninsula, keeping America engaged, and retaining the support of the voters who elected him? .
Reconciling those goals would test even the most experienced and cynical of politicians, so it is anyone's guess as to whether President Roh can succeed. .
Failure, however, offers such a horrific prospect that no one can possibly hope for it. .
The Unilateral Road to Peace .
In the next three weeks, the Israeli army will do something unprecedented: instead of defending the country against external enemies or terrorism, it will evacuate -- by force if necessary -- 9,000 Israelis from their homes. .
Israel's unilateral withdrawal is the outcome of a deep political shift that has been caused by two somewhat contradictory convictions that have characterized Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's policies since 2003: first, that the US-initiated "road map" is going nowhere and, second, that the status quo is untenable. .
Certainly, according to Sharon's thinking, there is no future for 9,000 Jewish settlers living among 1.2 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. .
Hence, in the absence of negotiations, a unilateral withdrawal is the only meaningful step towards de-escalation and stabilization. .
This policy has deeply divided Israel: the settlers -- mostly, but not exclusively religious -- feel betrayed by Sharon, "The Father of the Settlements." .
It is now the Israeli left that, however reluctantly, realizes that Sharon's new pragmatism may be the first step in the right direction. .
Like de Gaulle in Algeria, Sharon has reshuffled the cards of Israel's politics. .
The last weeks have seen massive demonstrations, some of them verging on violence; many of the settlers have declared that they will not obey government orders to evacuate. .
The army and the police have mobilized almost 50,000 troops to carry out evictions. .
This forcible approach is traumatic not only for the settlers, but also for many other Israelis. .
Only the next days and weeks will tell whether the evacuation proceeds peacefully or not. .
In the meantime, Sharon has paid heavily for his policies. .
Two right-wing parties have left his ruling coalition, he has lost his majority within his own Likud Party, and his finance minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, has quit his government. .
Only by bringing Shimon Peres's Labor Party into his cabinet did Sharon manage to retain his parliamentary majority. .
The question, of course, is what will happen after the Gaza disengagement. .
Many governments were initially skeptical about disengagement, but realized that -- as the Washington saying goes -- "this is the only game in town." .
Among them, as well as among the Palestinians, one hears the hope that after the Gaza withdrawal, it will be possible to return to the road map and to resume negotiations leading to a final agreement between Israel and the Palestinians. .
This is a major mistake. .
While motivated by the best of intentions, the hope of reviving the road map is out of touch with reality. .
Future negotiations will have to deal with the ultimate borders between Israel and Palestine, the fate of 200,000 Jewish settlers in the West Bank, the status of Jerusalem, and with the problem of the 1947-48 Palestinian refugees. .
On all of these issues, the gulf between the Israeli and Palestinian positions has not narrowed since the failed negotiations at Camp David in 2000, while fear and distrust have increased. .
To attempt negotiations under these circumstances would not only be an exercise in futility, but may merely deepen alienation and suspicion on both sides. .
The failure of the Annan Plan for Cyprus suggests that good intentions are not enough -- and the disagreements in Cyprus were miniscule compared to what divides Israelis and Palestinians. .
So what can be done? .
Probably the only rational way to proceed would be to acknowledge that unilateral steps on both sides can still further the cause of de-escalation and ultimate reconciliation. .
On the Israeli side, further disengagement from dozens of isolated and small settlements on the West Bank, entailing the evacuation of between 20,000 and 30,000 settlers, may be politically feasible and would give the Palestinians a contiguous territory on the West Bank. .
On the Palestinian side, consolidation of the Palestinian Authority's control over a dozen security services and militias would be an important step. .
Government stipends for tuition and for new and enlarged universities can play a big role, as can investment in computers and information technology in schools and communities. .
The social agenda and the technology agenda are not independent of each other. .
Both call upon Latin American societies to invest more in their people, so that Latin Americans can join the cutting edge of global productivity. .
If these investments reach all parts of Latin America, rich and poor, the region's prospects will brighten enormously. .
Are Housing Prices a House of Cards? .
The first big city to boom was London, starting around 1996. .
Boom mentality spread to Los Angeles, New York, and Sydney around 1997, to Paris in 1998, to Miami, Moscow, and Shanghai in 2001, and Vancouver around 2002. .
These and other cities have been booming pretty much ever since; prices in most are up at least 50% in real terms since 2000. .
This has been a big windfall to homeowners, but has hurt anyone planning to buy. .
Now growth in home prices is weakening in some of these cities. .
Think of Nokia, the mobile phone maker. .
Due to the economies of scale that the common market made possible, Nokia was able to exploit its inventions fully, while Germany's Siemens recently decided to give up on the mobile phone market. .
The third shock was the euro, which has induced a rapid convergence of long-term interest rates, which in some countries had been five to seven percentage points above the German level. .
Freed from exchange-rate risk, international investors no longer demanded a risk premium from these countries and were willing to provide funds to all of them under the same favorable conditions that previously had been reserved for Germany. .
This is good for Europe, because it helps improve the allocation of capital and stimulates growth by transporting German savings to the remote and previously disadvantaged regions of the euro zone. .
But it is of doubtful benefit to German workers who also would have liked to cooperate with that capital. .
The fourth shock was eastern EU enlargement, which has brought extraordinary chances for trade and investment in the east, but has also brought massive low-wage competition. .
On average, wage costs in the ten countries that joined the EU in 2004 are only 14% of the West German level. .
Low-wage competition has led to substantial outsourcing and off-shoring activities that have kept German firms competitive by reducing their demand for domestic labor. .
As neither Germany's unions nor its welfare state would accept falling wages, the result was higher unemployment and slower growth. .
The rate of price growth in London and New York slowed sharply over the past year, to only about a 1% real increase in the second quarter of 2004. .
The fifth shock was German unification, which is a failure in economic terms. .
GDP per working-age person in East Germany had been 61% of the West German level in 1996, but it is now only 59%. .
The slow growth of the eastern part of the country has pulled down the Germany-wide average, while the enormous demand for public funds in the east has increased public debt. .
The weak fiscal position has in turn undermined investors' confidence, with obvious implications for economic growth. .
All five shocks constitute historical developments that are good for the world as a whole, but problematic for Germany. .
In order for the country to meet the challenges and to continue to grow, it would have to make its labor markets flexible. .
Only if wages adjust downward to accommodate the new international environment can German workers become competitive again, so that the country returns to a higher employment level, exploiting its human capital up to the capacity constraint. .
The new government that voters will most likely elect in September will be confronted with the difficult task of confronting Germans with reality and pushing through the necessary reforms. .
Only then will we know whether Germany can meet the Toynbeean challenge it is facing. .
Lessons from the Tsunami .
In Sydney, home prices actually fell in the second quarter. .
There are many lessons that emerge from the tsunami that brought such devastation and loss of life to Asia. .
It demonstrated the power of globalization, as television brought vivid pictures of the destruction to homes around the world. .
Indeed, it is at times like this that the world truly does seem like a global village. .
Of course, it seemed to take somewhat longer for news of the extent of the disaster to reach the Crawford, Texas, ranch of President Bush. .
But, in the end, he decided to interrupt his vacation and offer amounts of aid that were successively revised upwards, in a global competition which promised to benefit those who were desperate for help. .
America's aid still appeared niggardly when compared with the amounts offered by countries with a fraction of America's economic wealth. .
Lightly populated Australia offered more than twice America's assistance, Japan promised almost 50% more, and Europe pledged more than five times as much. .
This led many observers to reflect on the fact that the world's richest country was in general the most miserly in foreign assistance -- all the more so in comparison to the amount it spends on war and defense. .
The disaster was international, so it was appropriate that the United Nations take the lead in coordinating the relief effort. .
Unfortunately, in an effort that was widely seen as another attempt to undermine multilateralism, the US tried to lead a "core group" driving the assistance program, ignoring ongoing efforts within the region and at the UN. .
Has the boom ended? .
Whatever America's motive, it later wisely decided to join the UN effort. .
The Bush administration's face-saving rhetoric that it had rushed to push together the core group in the absence of other efforts was quietly let to pass. .
The response of some countries within the region was truly impressive, showing how far they had come in establishing efficient and effective governments. .
Myriad details were addressed: Thailand flew ambassadors to the affected part of the country to help attend to the needs of their citizens, helped those who lost their money and passports return home, provided health care for the injured, set up systems to identify bodies, and dealt with the difficulties posed by shortages of body bags and the lack of cold storage facilities. .
Countries, like Thailand, that felt that they could handle the finances on their own asked that assistance be directed to others. .
They did ask one thing: a reduction of tariff barriers and greater access to markets abroad. .
They didn't want a handout, only a chance to earn income. .
The response, at least at the time of this column's writing, has mostly been deafening silence. .
On the other hand, the G-7 made a truly important contribution in offering debt relief. .
This is especially important for Indonesia, which must service a debt of $132 billion (of which $70 billion is owed to public creditors or guaranteed by government agencies). .
Will no other cities benefit? .
Even without the tsunami, this debt burden would have been an enormous hindrance to the country's development as it finally recovers from the aftermath of the 1997 financial crisis. .
Indeed, there is a compelling case to be made for Indonesian debt relief in any case, given that much of the debt was incurred in loans to the corrupt Suharto government. .
Lenders knew, or should have known, that not all of the money was going to help Indonesian development. .
Moreover, some of the debt was incurred as part of the 1997-1998 crisis, which was aggravated and deepened by IMF-imposed policies. .
No one pretends that we can prevent or alter the forces of nature. .
Rather, we have to learn to cope with them. .
There are now calls for improved tsunami early warning systems. .
But in one area, global warming, we have already received an early warning. .
Most countries have recognized this, coming together in Rio and Kyoto to do something about it—not enough, but the Kyoto protocol was intended only as a start. .
Sadly, global warming will likely destroy some of the same countries ravaged by the tsunami. .
Worse still, could the mood in housing markets soon lead prices in downward? .
Low lying islands like the Maldives will become submerged. .
No one predicted this boom, so predicting its end is risky. .
Housing prices have shown tremendous upward momentum in the face of previous warnings that the party is over. .
Any prediction concerning the boom's end requires understanding why it occurred in so many places. .
Surprisingly, there is no well-received explanation, because this boom's ultimate causes are mostly psychological. .
Economists would rather talk about interest rates or unemployment statistics - factors that are concrete and knowable. .
Of course, these indicators do have a legitimate role to play in explaining housing markets, but they are simply not adequate to account for the recent booms. .
Three psychological causes stand out: first, a change in people's perceptions about the source of value in a changing world economy; second, increasing public faith in "glamour" cities with international name recognition; and third, the plain giddy dynamics of speculative bubbles. .
Each factor deserves greater attention if we are to understand current housing market conditions and discern future price trends. .
First, the world economy does look more chaotic than it did a decade ago. .
The crash in equity prices since 2000 in most countries has made financial assets look less secure, spurring a "flight to quality" - in this case, housing. .
Moreover, terrorism is now viewed as a problem for everyone, with major tragedies in Indonesia, Spain, and Russia. .
People feel safest investing in their homes, and there is little reason to expect imminent change. .
Fear and upward momentum in home prices go together. .
Second, the public's faith in glamorous international cities has increased with the explosive growth in global communications due to the Internet and the cell phone. .
Just as people increasingly admire international celebrities, so they believe that world famous centers of business, technology, and culture - whose names are household words to people everywhere - are uniquely valuable. .
As with fear of terrorism and suspicion of equities, geographical celebrity appears resilient, if not self-reinforcing: the more famous New York, Paris, and London get, the more glamorous they become. .
Third, and no less important, is the speculative contagion that underlies any bubble. .
The current boom has seen contagion within markets and across markets, as rising prices fuel popular excitement - and hence further price increases - in the same city, and then in other cities, even on the other side of the globe. .
People in Shanghai may not talk about London home prices, but Shanghai's opinion leaders know what is happening in London, and the boom there makes it seem plausible that there should be a boom in Shanghai, too. .
In contrast to the other two psychological causes, speculative contagion has a natural end. .
A speculative bubble, sustaining itself solely by reaction to price increases, cannot go on forever. .
So, where does this leave us? .
Two of the three psychological causes suggest continued upward momentum in housing prices, while the third suggests that the momentum will come to an end some day, but does not pinpoint when. .
I am betting that some high-flying glamour cities will continue to see decelerating growth in home prices - and eventually decreases. .
Historically, housing prices have shown a lot of momentum, and prices in all these cities are still going up at a brisk rate, though usually somewhat slower than a year or more ago. .
Based on extrapolation of growth trends, it looks safe to predict that prices will go up substantially in most of these places for another year or more, even as the rate of increase continues to decline. .
The psychological factors are more important for longer-term forecasts, beyond a year, where momentum no longer plays an important role. .
At this point, there is likely to be some downward instability in prices, because enthusiasm for investing in houses is likely to wane in line with declining price growth. .
Prices in glamour cities are likely to drop sharply the next time there is a serious recession, or if the local economy suffers a severe shock, or if interest rates rise too fast. .
Then, contagion within and across markets can work in a downward direction, propelling prices lower for years. .
Water for All .
This month, water once again takes center stage at the Fourth World Water Forum in Mexico City. .
It is an opportune moment: while much of the world's attention has been fixed on issues of energy supply and security, hundreds of millions of people in the developing world continue to see the supply and security of fresh water as equally, if not more, important. .
Surveys undertaken by the World Bank in developing countries show that, when poor people are asked to name the three most important concerns they face, "good health" is always mentioned. .
And a key determinant of whether they will have good health or not is access to clean water. .
More than a billion people around the world today do not. .
As a result, they are increasingly vulnerable to poor health. .
The World Bank estimates that by 2035, as many as three billion people, almost all of them in developing countries, could live under conditions of severe water stress, especially if they happen to live in Africa, the Middle East, or South Asia. .
This will cause obvious hardship, but it will also hold back the economic growth needed for millions of people to escape poverty. .
In Latin America, about 15% of the population -- roughly 76 million people -- do not have access to safe water, and 116 million people do not have access to sanitation services. .
The figures are worse in Africa and parts of Asia. .
This is a situation that few people in rich countries face. .
Generally, these countries' citizens enjoy services that provide for all water needs, from drinking to irrigation to sanitation. .
In addition, other water-related issues, such as the risks posed by flooding, have been reduced to manageable levels. .
Rich industrial countries have invested early and heavily in water infrastructure, institutions, and management capacities. .
The result, beyond the health benefits for all, has been a proven record of economic growth; one only has to look at investment in hydropower to see the positive impact of water management projects on many economies. .
Granted, rich countries have a certain advantage: they benefit from generally moderate climates, with regular rainfall and relatively low risks of drought and flooding. .
Even so, they are not immune to water-related disasters, as Hurricane Katrina's destruction of New Orleans taught us. .
But the impact of such events on poor countries is much greater. .
Extreme rainfall variations, floods, and droughts can have huge social and economic effects and result in the large-scale loss of life. .
The Gulf coast of Mexico and Central American countries has repeatedly experienced such tragedies, with poor communities the most vulnerable and the least able to cope. .
Ethiopia and Yemen are equally stark examples. .
Ethiopia's development potential is closely tied to seasonal rains, so high rainfall variation, together with lack of infrastructure, has undermined growth and perpetuated poverty. .
A single drought can cut growth potential by 10% over an extended period. .
Yemen, for its part, has no perennial surface water; its citizens depend entirely on rainfall, groundwater, and flash flooding. .
To move forward, developing countries need new water infrastructure and better management. .
Any approach must be tailored to the circumstances of each country and the needs of its people, but there is no fundamental constraint to designing water development investments that ensure that local communities and the environment gain tangible and early benefits. .
In some countries, new water infrastructure may mean canals, pumping stations, and levees. .
Still others might need deeper reservoirs, more modern filtration plants, or improved water transport schemes. .
These can all potentially be designed to improve and expand water supplies for power generation, irrigation, and household and industrial use, while providing security against droughts and protection from floods. .
The key to successful increased investment in water infrastructure is an equally increased investment in water institutions. .
Badly managed infrastructure will do little to improve peoples' health or support economic growth, so water development and water management must go hand in hand. .
Water infrastructure can and must be developed in parallel with sound institutions, good governance, great attention to the environment, and an equitable sharing of costs and benefits. .
A water investment policy that reduces the vulnerability of the poor and offers basic water security for all will require customized planning and an effective partnership of donor countries, developing country governments, the private sector, and local communities. .
Delegates to the World Water Forum will have ample opportunity to forge and/or strengthen these partnerships. .
If they succeed, the rewards for the world's poor will be immense. .
Germany's Five Shocks .
Over the last decade, Germany has been the slowest growing economy in the European Union, and Europe has been the slowest growing continent in the world. .
From 1995 to 2005, Germany will have grown by only 14.6%, while the old EU on average will have grown by 24%, the US by 39.9%, and the world economy by 45.6%. .
Why has Germany performed so badly? .
One theory, endorsed by the head of Germany's ruling Social Democratic Party, Franz Müntefering, is that Germany is already where the others still want to be. .
Slow German growth, he maintains, is a sign of natural convergence. .
But this theory is not convincing. .
Germany has recently been overtaken in terms of per capita income by several EU countries, including Ireland, the UK, the Netherlands, and France, and is still growing more slowly than all of them. .
Another, more plausible theory is that over the past fifteen years there have been various external challenges or shocks that have hit the country simultaneously. .
Rigid as it was, with an extensive welfare system and an over-regulated labor market, Germany was unable to react to these shocks and ran into trouble. .
This theory recalls that of the British historian Arnold Toynbee, according to which empires collapse because they are unable to react to external challenges. .
The first shock was intensified globalization, which brought a lot of new low-wage competition. .
Although globalization is a gradual process, it gained momentum when China decided to play the game. .
China is ten times the size of Japan, and Japan was not easy to deal with, either. .
German precision instruments and optical equipment, for example, lost their competitive edge when Japan entered the game. .
The second shock was EU integration, including the northern and southern enlargements. .
The dismantling of the EU's internal borders boosted each country's market size and brought about the predicted economies of scale. .
But this helped Europe's small countries more than the big ones, and it implied more competition for Germany, Europe's biggest economy. .
They have learned the lesson from Latin America and Asia in the 1990's. .
Adopting the Euro would give them a great way to escape such risks and focus on creating real growth in their economies. .
But the response from EU institutions, namely the European Central Bank and the European Commission, has been negative: candidate countries were told that they first must spend at least two years in the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM II), where Euro aspirants are expected to prove their policy mettle. .
Initially, even currency boards were considered unacceptable, although, as is often the case in Europe, exceptions were made: countries with currency boards could keep them after entry into the EU. .
The opposition of the ECB and the Commission to rapid Euro adoption lacks strong foundations. .
What should matter for the EU is that the policies of any member state are not harmful to other members. .
As Leszek Balcerowicz, the Governor of the National Bank of Poland, argues, adoption of the Euro by candidate countries will certainly create benefits for candidate countries, while in the worst case being neutral for current members. .
Indeed, the combined size of the candidate countries' economies is so small--around 6% of the enlarged EU's GDP--that they cannot possibly exert any significant effect on the Euro. .
But continuing opposition by EU institutions has led most candidate countries to abandon the idea of adopting the Euro unilaterally or as quickly as possible after entering the Union. .
Unfortunately, the stubbornness of the ECB and the European Commission is now providing ammunition to populist governments in accession countries that are counting on currency appreciation to escape the fiscal discipline that adopting the Euro would imply. .
Saved by Taxes .
What do we owe to our great-great-great-grandchildren? .
What actions are we obligated to take now in order to diminish the risks to our descendants and our planet from the increasing likelihood of global warming and climate change? .
Almost everyone -- except the likes of ExxonMobil, US Vice President Dick Cheney, and their paid servants and deluded acolytes -- understands that when humans burn hydrocarbons, carbon dioxide goes into the atmosphere, where it acts like a giant blanket, absorbing infrared radiation coming up from below and warming the earth. .
Likewise, almost everyone understands that while global warming might be a much smaller or larger problem than existing models suggest, this uncertainty is no excuse for inaction. .
In fact, uncertainty about global climate change should lead us to do more to guard against it than if we knew it would proceed exactly according to the central-case projections. .
Finally, almost everyone agrees that governments, non-profit institutions, and energy companies should be spending far more to develop technologies that generate non-carbon-emitting power, that remove it from the atmosphere to forests or oceans, and that cool the earth by reflecting more of the sunlight that lands on it. .
Clearly, the world's rich countries should carry the burden of dealing with climate change over the next generations. .
After all, they could take an easy, emissions-intensive path to industrialization and wealth. .
Today, China, India, and other developing countries cannot, and it would be unfair to penalize them for that. .
However, such fiscal expansion would probably disqualify a country from entering the Euro any time soon. .
So now is the time to build, not disrupt or impede, the international institutions that will manage our response to global climate change in the years ahead. .
But should we be doing anything else now and in the next decade? .
Economists like to think of things in terms of prices. .
And when economists see behavior that has destructive side effects, we like to tax it. .
Taxation makes individuals feel in their wallets the destruction they are causing. .
Imposing a tax on those who, say, drive low-mileage SUV's is a way of harnessing humanity's collective intelligence to decide when bad side effects are a reason to alter behavior. .
But it has to be the right tax. .
An SUV going ten miles in the city and burning a gallon of gasoline pumps about three kilograms of carbon into the atmosphere. .
Should the extra "global warming" tax be $0.05 a gallon, $0.50 a gallon, or $1.50 a gallon? .
Our views will change as we learn more, but at the moment the size of the tax hinges on a question of moral philosophy: how much do we believe we owe our distant descendents? .
Indeed, the accession countries that have not implemented a currency board have seen their budget deficits surge--exceeding 9% of GDP in Hungary in 2002 and more than 5% in Poland, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia--while large capital inflows have kept their currencies under strong pressure to appreciate. .
The Australian economist John Quiggin has an illuminating discussion on his website ( .
On the other hand, critics point out that the world today is poor: average annual GDP per capita at purchasing power parity is roughly $7,000. .
We expect improved technology and its spread to make the world of 2100, at a 2% annual growth rate, much richer: $50,000 per capita of year-2006 purchasing power. .
So the critics argue that we need the marginal $70 per capita today much more than the richer people of 2100 will need the $500 that they would gain from being spared the effects of global climate change. .
But what the critics often don't say is that the same logic applies to the world today. .
Average annual per capita incomes in the US, Japan, and Western Europe are currently around $40,000, and less than $6,000 for the poorer half of the world's population. .
The same logic that says we need our $70 more than the people of 2100 need an extra $500 dictates that we should tax the world's rich more, as long as each extra $500 in first-world taxes generates as little as an extra $70 in poor countries per capita incomes. .
In short, if the world's rich are stingy today toward our much richer descendants, and if we want to leave our environmental mess to them to deal with, we should be lavish toward the world's poor. .
Likewise, if we are stingy today toward the world's poor, we should be lavish toward our descendents. .
At least, that is what we should do, if our actions are based on some moral principle, rather than that of Leonid Brezhnev: what we have, we hold. .
This trend exposes candidate countries' real economies to precisely the risk of a capital flow reversal and currency crisis that early Euro adoption was meant to eliminate. .
Taking Drug Safety Seriously .
Health hazards -- nuclear reactors, guns, and contaminated foods -- surround all of us, so governments take an active role in limiting these hazards through regulations, which, in many cases, are very successful. .
But the situation is far different concerning the safety of prescription drugs. .
Indeed, as far as protecting the public is concerned, drug safety is the regulator's neglected stepchild. .
The magnitude of the problem is huge. .
In the United States alone, it is estimated that every year up to 100,000 patients die due to serious adverse drug reactions (ADR's). .
If true, drug-induced death would qualify as the fourth or fifth leading cause of death (depending on which mortality estimates are used). .
Moreover, the direct annual hospital costs attributable to ADR's run into the billions of dollars, and this does not include all the suffering that ADR's cause that does not lead to hospitalization (or death). .
The difficulties in determining cause and effect must be acknowledged. .
Whether a patient's death or hospitalization is due to a particular drug, the underlying illness, or a combination of the two can be hard to determine. .
It is ironic that the candidate countries are being lectured to by officials at the ECB and the European Commission on the trade-off between nominal and real convergence. .
But this makes drug safety all the more important. .
Inherent to drug safety is the fact that all drugs, in addition to their benefits, cause harm in certain patients. .
Drug approval and use requires a careful weighing of desirable and undesirable effects. .
These judgments vary, depending on whether they are made by a drug company, which stands to benefit from sales, or a patient at risk of suffering a serious adverse effect. .
Incomplete knowledge complicates this assessment. .
The rush to get new drugs to market often leads to inadequate safety documentation. .
More than half of all approved drugs produce a serious adverse reaction that is not known at the time of regulatory approval. .
For example, when the new class of painkillers called Cox-2 inhibitors was introduced, regulators, physicians, and patients were unaware that these drugs could cause heart attacks and strokes. .
Tens of thousands of innocent patients -- perhaps more -- suffered such ADR's before the first two drugs of this class were withdrawn. .
Proper and complete documentation of harmful drug effects is difficult. .
The objective of growth for the accession countries is apparently the sole imperative in Brussels; macroeconomic stability can wait. .
Spontaneous reporting rates to regulatory agencies are low -- approximately 1% -- and ongoing monitoring is passive in many countries. .
Large budget deficits support growth, but inflation evidently is not a problem. .
If this line of thought sounds familiar, perhaps it is because it (more or less) recapitulates the foundations of the unsustainable planning system with which the accession countries broke at the beginning of the 1990's. .
It was, of course, the embrace of rational, market-driven economic policies by the former communist nations that has brought them to the brink of EU membership. .
So European institutions should abandon their paternalistic approach and take seriously the concerns of accession countries' central bankers about the risks of maintaining their own currencies for a long period during which their economies have to open up completely to capital flows. .
As it is, the ECB and the European Commission are de facto supporting the positions of populist governments in Eastern Europe that are already spending the funds they hope to get in the future from the EU. .
It is high time that EU institutions address more seriously the challenges and opportunities posed by enlargement. .
They can begin by viewing accession countries' early adoption of the Euro more favorably, both for countries with a currency board and for those with floating exchange rates. .
Blair's EU disaster .
When voters in France and the Netherlands turned down the proposal for a Constitution for the European Union, the world knew that the European project was in deep trouble. .
Last week's bruising battle over the medium-term future of the Union's budget has confirmed that verdict with a vengeance. .
It also brought to a sorry close the UK's six-month presidency of the European Council, confirming Britain's long-standing reputation as the odd-man-out in the European Union. .
The two events are intimately connected. .
French and Dutch voters did not say why they voted against the planned Constitution. .
But many commentators believe that they were protesting against what they perceived as the precipitate admission of ten new member states, mainly much poorer countries from Central and Eastern Europe. .
In particular, voters were afraid that their jobs would be lost to hordes of Eastern immigrants, exemplified in the image widely quoted at the time, of the low-cost Polish plumber. .
The irony, of course, was that most of the 15 old member states had refused to give the new members full and immediate access to the Western job markets. .
But in any event, it was too late to protest: the ten Eastern states had already been granted membership of the Union. .
But now the 25 member states must deal with the financial consequences of that enlargement, not just in the overall size of the European Union budget for the next seven years, but in who pays and who benefits. .
In particular, the central issue is how far the old member states are willing to pay to boost the less developed economies of the new members. .
In the event, it turned into a three-way battle between Britain, France and the new member states. .
Traditionally, a large majority of the budget has gone either on agriculture or on the development of backward regions. .
In practice, this has meant large flows of money either to big agricultural producers, like France, or to poorer member states, like Greece and Portugal. .
On both counts, the new member states expected to benefit substantially from the EU system. .
In the past, the big loser from the EU system, in budgetary terms, was the UK; for while agriculture accounted for two thirds of all EU spending, the UK had a small farm sector, and therefore received small farm payments. .
The British long complained of the unfairness of these rules, especially in view of the fact that the UK was one of the relatively poorer member states; and in 1984, Margaret Thatcher's Conservative government demanded, and got, a massive rebate on its net contribution to the EU budget. .
Today, the situation has changed in three important respects. .
EU farm policy has started to be reformed, and its share of the EU budget has fallen from over 60% to 40%; Britain has for several years enjoyed significantly faster economic growth than most other member states, so that it is now one of the richer EU countries, even compared with France and Germany; and the new member states are so much poorer than even the poorest of the old members, that they have an unanswerable moral case for a generous share of whatever budget could be negotiated. .
When negotiations started six months ago, it was Britain's turn to take over the Presidency of the European Council. .
Tony Blair, British Prime Minister, electrified the world of European politics by telling the European Parliament that he was a "passionate pro-European". .
This was a message for which Britain's European friends had long been hoping, and for which they had waited in vain since Blair's election in 1997. .
Certainly, he had never expressed any such sentiment inside the British Isles during the previous eight years. .
Since Britain had been one of the most insistent advocates of enlargement of the EU to the candidates from Central and Eastern Europe, one might have expected that the Blair government would have wished to be correspondingly generous to the new-comers in the conduct of the budgetary negotiations. .
At first, this seemed to be the British government's chosen tactic. .
Against all expectations, it struck a morally advantageous posture by offering to surrender some part of its budget rebate, but only if the rest of the European Union (i.e. France, in particular) would agree to fundamental reforms of EU farm policy. .
It took some time before the British came to understand that since President Jacques Chirac is a beleaguered lame-duck President, who will remain in office but not in power until 2007, he is in no position to agree to any such bargain. .
So when the British came to terms with this harsh reality, they played out the lamentable end-game of their management of the negotiations with small-minded cheese-paring and logic-chopping offers, all designed primarily to safeguard narrow British interests, mainly at the expense of the new member states. .
It is a sad conclusion to a presidency, launched six-months ago, with Blair's claim that he was a "passionate pro-European". .
Yet the full text of his speech tells it all. .
Blair is in favour of Europe; but not this Europe. .
He wants to be a part of a political Europe; but only if the other member states follow Britain's model of economic and social reform. .
The problem is that economic and social reform are purely national responsibilities, and do not lie within the competence of the Union; if there is to be economic and social reform in France and Germany, that is a matter exclusively for French and German voters and politicians. .
It could only be a European matter, if the EU were a real federation. .
Is Blair a federalist, then? .
Heavens, no! .
He is merely an unthinking nationalist, living in terror of the nationalist yellow tabloid press. .
So why does he say he is a passionate pro-European? .
Because he has not thought about the question for one moment. .
Europe's Neo-Liberal Challenge .
For over 20 years I have argued that Western Europe's high unemployment rates are unsustainable. .
At the end of the 1970's, monetarists bet that only a transitory and modest increase in unemployment could rein in the creeping -- and trotting -- inflation of the industrial west, and that in retrospect the cost of returning to effective price stability would be judged worthwhile. .
In Britain and the United States, this monetarist bet turned out well. .
In Western Europe, it did not. .
Over the past 25 years in Europe, unemployment rose as monetary policy was tightened and interest rates were raised to fight inflation. .
But after inflation succumbed, unemployment did not fall -- or not by much. .
If unemployment was not stuck quite at Great Depression levels, it remained high enough to make long-term joblessness or the fear of long-term joblessness a defining experience. .
Societies in which the official unemployment rate stands at 10% or more for generations are societies in which government economic management has failed. .
So, for 20 years it has seemed to me that Western Europe's underlying political equilibrium -- corporatist bargaining and ample social insurance, on the one hand, and tight monetary policies, on the other -- must crack. .
Twin fears appear to be paralyzing European policymakers. .
Europe's central bankers fear that their political masters will order them to loosen monetary policy, that the structural reforms needed to free up aggregate supply will not be forthcoming, and that the result will be a return to the inflation of the 1970's. .
In short, they fear that all of the sacrifices made for price stability will have been in vain. .
West European politicians, for their part, fear the opposite outcome. .
They worry that even after undertaking structural reforms to reduce the attractiveness of unemployment benefits and increase the ability of workers to move to jobs and of firms to move to workers, central bankers will continue to insist on tight money. .
In short, they fear that, with no expansion of output or employment, the net effect will simply be an increase in poverty. .
Of course, these fears are accompanied by the hope that structural reforms and monetary expansion work in harmony, boosting employment and output without raising inflation by much. .
But the reality is that steps toward looser monetary policies are non-existent -- especially with the fledgling European Central Bank anxious to establish its inflation-fighting credibility -- and that steps toward structural reforms are half-hearted, hesitant, and small. .
For 20 years, I have been wrong: West European polities have remained stable despite the exclusion of a large proportion of citizens from meaningful participation in much of economic life. .
West European economies have continued to grow -- albeit not as rapidly as they might have -- despite bearing the heavy burden of the unemployed 10% or more of the labor force. .
Now, though, it looks like I may finally be right -- or at least right to worry, if not to panic. .
The French rejected the European Union constitution, primarily -- or so it appears -- because further European integration, it is feared, must bring in its wake the huge costs and disruptions of neo-liberalism. .
It is one thing to back the "European project" when the idea is to bind Germany so tightly to France that never again will anybody think it worthwhile to wage a war over what language is spoken in Alsace-Lorraine. .
It is another when the European project means that French workers face competition from Polish plumbers, Romanian farmers, and Turkish shop clerks. .
In Germany, the electorate seems poised to eject Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder out of discontent with his tepid allegiance to the neo-liberal project. .
The problem is that the electorate will then get four years of rule by a chancellor, Angela Merkel, whose commitment to the neo-liberal project is almost as strong as mine. .
I think that Germany would be better off in a decade under more neo-liberal policies. .
But this does not seem to be what the German electorate wants, and this makes the complexion of German politics four years from now incalculable. .
Coupled with all this is northern European discontent with the central bankers, specifically with the ECB and the euro. .
It is not that the end of European Monetary Union is on the agenda; it is merely that people have begun thinking about possible low-probability futures in which the end of EMU might be placed on the agenda. .
That is enough to shake asset prices worldwide. .
Western Europe's accomplishments since World War II are among the most heartening and impressive success stories in world history. .
Everyone should want today's undivided Europe to build on these accomplishments, rather than for generations of high unemployment to jeopardize them. .
But this will require a shift in the ECB's attitude. .
Europe needs a monetary policy that views aiding employment growth in northern Europe as more important than continental price stability. .
There will, after all be inflation in southern and eastern Europe -- there must be, for as regions develop and industrialize their terms of trade must improve, and under a monetary union regional inflation is how this can happen. .
The ECB should not try to balance inflation in the south and east with deflation in the north in order to hit artificial continent-wide targets. .
They have learned the lesson from Latin America and Asia in the 1990's. .
Adopting the Euro would give them a great way to escape such risks and focus on creating real growth in their economies. .
But the response from EU institutions, namely the European Central Bank and the European Commission, has been negative: candidate countries were told that they first must spend at least two years in the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM II), where Euro aspirants are expected to prove their policy mettle. .
Initially, even currency boards were considered unacceptable, although, as is often the case in Europe, exceptions were made: countries with currency boards could keep them after entry into the EU. .
The opposition of the ECB and the Commission to rapid Euro adoption lacks strong foundations. .
What should matter for the EU is that the policies of any member state are not harmful to other members. .
As Leszek Balcerowicz, the Governor of the National Bank of Poland, argues, adoption of the Euro by candidate countries will certainly create benefits for candidate countries, while in the worst case being neutral for current members. .
Indeed, the combined size of the candidate countries' economies is so small--around 6% of the enlarged EU's GDP--that they cannot possibly exert any significant effect on the Euro. .
But continuing opposition by EU institutions has led most candidate countries to abandon the idea of adopting the Euro unilaterally or as quickly as possible after entering the Union. .
Unfortunately, the stubbornness of the ECB and the European Commission is now providing ammunition to populist governments in accession countries that are counting on currency appreciation to escape the fiscal discipline that adopting the Euro would imply. .
Saved by Taxes .
What do we owe to our great-great-great-grandchildren? .
What actions are we obligated to take now in order to diminish the risks to our descendants and our planet from the increasing likelihood of global warming and climate change? .
Almost everyone -- except the likes of ExxonMobil, US Vice President Dick Cheney, and their paid servants and deluded acolytes -- understands that when humans burn hydrocarbons, carbon dioxide goes into the atmosphere, where it acts like a giant blanket, absorbing infrared radiation coming up from below and warming the earth. .
Likewise, almost everyone understands that while global warming might be a much smaller or larger problem than existing models suggest, this uncertainty is no excuse for inaction. .
In fact, uncertainty about global climate change should lead us to do more to guard against it than if we knew it would proceed exactly according to the central-case projections. .
Finally, almost everyone agrees that governments, non-profit institutions, and energy companies should be spending far more to develop technologies that generate non-carbon-emitting power, that remove it from the atmosphere to forests or oceans, and that cool the earth by reflecting more of the sunlight that lands on it. .
Clearly, the world's rich countries should carry the burden of dealing with climate change over the next generations. .
After all, they could take an easy, emissions-intensive path to industrialization and wealth. .
Today, China, India, and other developing countries cannot, and it would be unfair to penalize them for that. .
However, such fiscal expansion would probably disqualify a country from entering the Euro any time soon. .
So now is the time to build, not disrupt or impede, the international institutions that will manage our response to global climate change in the years ahead. .
But should we be doing anything else now and in the next decade? .
Economists like to think of things in terms of prices. .
And when economists see behavior that has destructive side effects, we like to tax it. .
Taxation makes individuals feel in their wallets the destruction they are causing. .
Imposing a tax on those who, say, drive low-mileage SUV's is a way of harnessing humanity's collective intelligence to decide when bad side effects are a reason to alter behavior. .
But it has to be the right tax. .
An SUV going ten miles in the city and burning a gallon of gasoline pumps about three kilograms of carbon into the atmosphere. .
Should the extra "global warming" tax be $0.05 a gallon, $0.50 a gallon, or $1.50 a gallon? .
Our views will change as we learn more, but at the moment the size of the tax hinges on a question of moral philosophy: how much do we believe we owe our distant descendents? .
Indeed, the accession countries that have not implemented a currency board have seen their budget deficits surge--exceeding 9% of GDP in Hungary in 2002 and more than 5% in Poland, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia--while large capital inflows have kept their currencies under strong pressure to appreciate. .
The Australian economist John Quiggin has an illuminating discussion on his website ( .
On the other hand, critics point out that the world today is poor: average annual GDP per capita at purchasing power parity is roughly $7,000. .
We expect improved technology and its spread to make the world of 2100, at a 2% annual growth rate, much richer: $50,000 per capita of year-2006 purchasing power. .
So the critics argue that we need the marginal $70 per capita today much more than the richer people of 2100 will need the $500 that they would gain from being spared the effects of global climate change. .
But what the critics often don't say is that the same logic applies to the world today. .
Average annual per capita incomes in the US, Japan, and Western Europe are currently around $40,000, and less than $6,000 for the poorer half of the world's population. .
The same logic that says we need our $70 more than the people of 2100 need an extra $500 dictates that we should tax the world's rich more, as long as each extra $500 in first-world taxes generates as little as an extra $70 in poor countries per capita incomes. .
In short, if the world's rich are stingy today toward our much richer descendants, and if we want to leave our environmental mess to them to deal with, we should be lavish toward the world's poor. .
Likewise, if we are stingy today toward the world's poor, we should be lavish toward our descendents. .
At least, that is what we should do, if our actions are based on some moral principle, rather than that of Leonid Brezhnev: what we have, we hold. .
This trend exposes candidate countries' real economies to precisely the risk of a capital flow reversal and currency crisis that early Euro adoption was meant to eliminate. .
Taking Drug Safety Seriously .
Health hazards -- nuclear reactors, guns, and contaminated foods -- surround all of us, so governments take an active role in limiting these hazards through regulations, which, in many cases, are very successful. .
But the situation is far different concerning the safety of prescription drugs. .
Indeed, as far as protecting the public is concerned, drug safety is the regulator's neglected stepchild. .
The magnitude of the problem is huge. .
In the United States alone, it is estimated that every year up to 100,000 patients die due to serious adverse drug reactions (ADR's). .
If true, drug-induced death would qualify as the fourth or fifth leading cause of death (depending on which mortality estimates are used). .
Moreover, the direct annual hospital costs attributable to ADR's run into the billions of dollars, and this does not include all the suffering that ADR's cause that does not lead to hospitalization (or death). .
The difficulties in determining cause and effect must be acknowledged. .
Whether a patient's death or hospitalization is due to a particular drug, the underlying illness, or a combination of the two can be hard to determine. .
It is ironic that the candidate countries are being lectured to by officials at the ECB and the European Commission on the trade-off between nominal and real convergence. .
But this makes drug safety all the more important. .
Inherent to drug safety is the fact that all drugs, in addition to their benefits, cause harm in certain patients. .
Drug approval and use requires a careful weighing of desirable and undesirable effects. .
These judgments vary, depending on whether they are made by a drug company, which stands to benefit from sales, or a patient at risk of suffering a serious adverse effect. .
Incomplete knowledge complicates this assessment. .
The rush to get new drugs to market often leads to inadequate safety documentation. .
More than half of all approved drugs produce a serious adverse reaction that is not known at the time of regulatory approval. .
For example, when the new class of painkillers called Cox-2 inhibitors was introduced, regulators, physicians, and patients were unaware that these drugs could cause heart attacks and strokes. .
Tens of thousands of innocent patients -- perhaps more -- suffered such ADR's before the first two drugs of this class were withdrawn. .
Proper and complete documentation of harmful drug effects is difficult. .
The objective of growth for the accession countries is apparently the sole imperative in Brussels; macroeconomic stability can wait. .
Spontaneous reporting rates to regulatory agencies are low -- approximately 1% -- and ongoing monitoring is passive in many countries. .
Large budget deficits support growth, but inflation evidently is not a problem. .
If this line of thought sounds familiar, perhaps it is because it (more or less) recapitulates the foundations of the unsustainable planning system with which the accession countries broke at the beginning of the 1990's. .
It was, of course, the embrace of rational, market-driven economic policies by the former communist nations that has brought them to the brink of EU membership. .
So European institutions should abandon their paternalistic approach and take seriously the concerns of accession countries' central bankers about the risks of maintaining their own currencies for a long period during which their economies have to open up completely to capital flows. .
As it is, the ECB and the European Commission are de facto supporting the positions of populist governments in Eastern Europe that are already spending the funds they hope to get in the future from the EU. .
It is high time that EU institutions address more seriously the challenges and opportunities posed by enlargement. .
They can begin by viewing accession countries' early adoption of the Euro more favorably, both for countries with a currency board and for those with floating exchange rates. .
Blair's EU disaster .
When voters in France and the Netherlands turned down the proposal for a Constitution for the European Union, the world knew that the European project was in deep trouble. .
Last week's bruising battle over the medium-term future of the Union's budget has confirmed that verdict with a vengeance. .
It also brought to a sorry close the UK's six-month presidency of the European Council, confirming Britain's long-standing reputation as the odd-man-out in the European Union. .
The two events are intimately connected. .
French and Dutch voters did not say why they voted against the planned Constitution. .
But many commentators believe that they were protesting against what they perceived as the precipitate admission of ten new member states, mainly much poorer countries from Central and Eastern Europe. .
In particular, voters were afraid that their jobs would be lost to hordes of Eastern immigrants, exemplified in the image widely quoted at the time, of the low-cost Polish plumber. .
The irony, of course, was that most of the 15 old member states had refused to give the new members full and immediate access to the Western job markets. .
But in any event, it was too late to protest: the ten Eastern states had already been granted membership of the Union. .
But now the 25 member states must deal with the financial consequences of that enlargement, not just in the overall size of the European Union budget for the next seven years, but in who pays and who benefits. .
In particular, the central issue is how far the old member states are willing to pay to boost the less developed economies of the new members. .
In the event, it turned into a three-way battle between Britain, France and the new member states. .
Traditionally, a large majority of the budget has gone either on agriculture or on the development of backward regions. .
In practice, this has meant large flows of money either to big agricultural producers, like France, or to poorer member states, like Greece and Portugal. .
On both counts, the new member states expected to benefit substantially from the EU system. .
In the past, the big loser from the EU system, in budgetary terms, was the UK; for while agriculture accounted for two thirds of all EU spending, the UK had a small farm sector, and therefore received small farm payments. .
The British long complained of the unfairness of these rules, especially in view of the fact that the UK was one of the relatively poorer member states; and in 1984, Margaret Thatcher's Conservative government demanded, and got, a massive rebate on its net contribution to the EU budget. .
Today, the situation has changed in three important respects. .
EU farm policy has started to be reformed, and its share of the EU budget has fallen from over 60% to 40%; Britain has for several years enjoyed significantly faster economic growth than most other member states, so that it is now one of the richer EU countries, even compared with France and Germany; and the new member states are so much poorer than even the poorest of the old members, that they have an unanswerable moral case for a generous share of whatever budget could be negotiated. .
When negotiations started six months ago, it was Britain's turn to take over the Presidency of the European Council. .
Tony Blair, British Prime Minister, electrified the world of European politics by telling the European Parliament that he was a "passionate pro-European". .
This was a message for which Britain's European friends had long been hoping, and for which they had waited in vain since Blair's election in 1997. .
Certainly, he had never expressed any such sentiment inside the British Isles during the previous eight years. .
Since Britain had been one of the most insistent advocates of enlargement of the EU to the candidates from Central and Eastern Europe, one might have expected that the Blair government would have wished to be correspondingly generous to the new-comers in the conduct of the budgetary negotiations. .
At first, this seemed to be the British government's chosen tactic. .
Against all expectations, it struck a morally advantageous posture by offering to surrender some part of its budget rebate, but only if the rest of the European Union (i.e. France, in particular) would agree to fundamental reforms of EU farm policy. .
It took some time before the British came to understand that since President Jacques Chirac is a beleaguered lame-duck President, who will remain in office but not in power until 2007, he is in no position to agree to any such bargain. .
So when the British came to terms with this harsh reality, they played out the lamentable end-game of their management of the negotiations with small-minded cheese-paring and logic-chopping offers, all designed primarily to safeguard narrow British interests, mainly at the expense of the new member states. .
It is a sad conclusion to a presidency, launched six-months ago, with Blair's claim that he was a "passionate pro-European". .
Yet the full text of his speech tells it all. .
Blair is in favour of Europe; but not this Europe. .
He wants to be a part of a political Europe; but only if the other member states follow Britain's model of economic and social reform. .
The problem is that economic and social reform are purely national responsibilities, and do not lie within the competence of the Union; if there is to be economic and social reform in France and Germany, that is a matter exclusively for French and German voters and politicians. .
It could only be a European matter, if the EU were a real federation. .
Is Blair a federalist, then? .
Heavens, no! .
He is merely an unthinking nationalist, living in terror of the nationalist yellow tabloid press. .
So why does he say he is a passionate pro-European? .
Because he has not thought about the question for one moment. .
Europe's Neo-Liberal Challenge .
For over 20 years I have argued that Western Europe's high unemployment rates are unsustainable. .
At the end of the 1970's, monetarists bet that only a transitory and modest increase in unemployment could rein in the creeping -- and trotting -- inflation of the industrial west, and that in retrospect the cost of returning to effective price stability would be judged worthwhile. .
In Britain and the United States, this monetarist bet turned out well. .
In Western Europe, it did not. .
Over the past 25 years in Europe, unemployment rose as monetary policy was tightened and interest rates were raised to fight inflation. .
But after inflation succumbed, unemployment did not fall -- or not by much. .
If unemployment was not stuck quite at Great Depression levels, it remained high enough to make long-term joblessness or the fear of long-term joblessness a defining experience. .
Societies in which the official unemployment rate stands at 10% or more for generations are societies in which government economic management has failed. .
So, for 20 years it has seemed to me that Western Europe's underlying political equilibrium -- corporatist bargaining and ample social insurance, on the one hand, and tight monetary policies, on the other -- must crack. .
Twin fears appear to be paralyzing European policymakers. .
Europe's central bankers fear that their political masters will order them to loosen monetary policy, that the structural reforms needed to free up aggregate supply will not be forthcoming, and that the result will be a return to the inflation of the 1970's. .
In short, they fear that all of the sacrifices made for price stability will have been in vain. .
West European politicians, for their part, fear the opposite outcome. .
They worry that even after undertaking structural reforms to reduce the attractiveness of unemployment benefits and increase the ability of workers to move to jobs and of firms to move to workers, central bankers will continue to insist on tight money. .
In short, they fear that, with no expansion of output or employment, the net effect will simply be an increase in poverty. .
Of course, these fears are accompanied by the hope that structural reforms and monetary expansion work in harmony, boosting employment and output without raising inflation by much. .
But the reality is that steps toward looser monetary policies are non-existent -- especially with the fledgling European Central Bank anxious to establish its inflation-fighting credibility -- and that steps toward structural reforms are half-hearted, hesitant, and small. .
For 20 years, I have been wrong: West European polities have remained stable despite the exclusion of a large proportion of citizens from meaningful participation in much of economic life. .
West European economies have continued to grow -- albeit not as rapidly as they might have -- despite bearing the heavy burden of the unemployed 10% or more of the labor force. .
Now, though, it looks like I may finally be right -- or at least right to worry, if not to panic. .
The French rejected the European Union constitution, primarily -- or so it appears -- because further European integration, it is feared, must bring in its wake the huge costs and disruptions of neo-liberalism. .
It is one thing to back the "European project" when the idea is to bind Germany so tightly to France that never again will anybody think it worthwhile to wage a war over what language is spoken in Alsace-Lorraine. .
It is another when the European project means that French workers face competition from Polish plumbers, Romanian farmers, and Turkish shop clerks. .
In Germany, the electorate seems poised to eject Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder out of discontent with his tepid allegiance to the neo-liberal project. .
The problem is that the electorate will then get four years of rule by a chancellor, Angela Merkel, whose commitment to the neo-liberal project is almost as strong as mine. .
I think that Germany would be better off in a decade under more neo-liberal policies. .
But this does not seem to be what the German electorate wants, and this makes the complexion of German politics four years from now incalculable. .
Coupled with all this is northern European discontent with the central bankers, specifically with the ECB and the euro. .
It is not that the end of European Monetary Union is on the agenda; it is merely that people have begun thinking about possible low-probability futures in which the end of EMU might be placed on the agenda. .
That is enough to shake asset prices worldwide. .
Western Europe's accomplishments since World War II are among the most heartening and impressive success stories in world history. .
Everyone should want today's undivided Europe to build on these accomplishments, rather than for generations of high unemployment to jeopardize them. .
But this will require a shift in the ECB's attitude. .
Europe needs a monetary policy that views aiding employment growth in northern Europe as more important than continental price stability. .
There will, after all be inflation in southern and eastern Europe -- there must be, for as regions develop and industrialize their terms of trade must improve, and under a monetary union regional inflation is how this can happen. .
The ECB should not try to balance inflation in the south and east with deflation in the north in order to hit artificial continent-wide targets. .
They have learned the lesson from Latin America and Asia in the 1990's. .
Adopting the Euro would give them a great way to escape such risks and focus on creating real growth in their economies. .
But the response from EU institutions, namely the European Central Bank and the European Commission, has been negative: candidate countries were told that they first must spend at least two years in the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM II), where Euro aspirants are expected to prove their policy mettle. .
Initially, even currency boards were considered unacceptable, although, as is often the case in Europe, exceptions were made: countries with currency boards could keep them after entry into the EU. .
The opposition of the ECB and the Commission to rapid Euro adoption lacks strong foundations. .
What should matter for the EU is that the policies of any member state are not harmful to other members. .
As Leszek Balcerowicz, the Governor of the National Bank of Poland, argues, adoption of the Euro by candidate countries will certainly create benefits for candidate countries, while in the worst case being neutral for current members. .
Indeed, the combined size of the candidate countries' economies is so small--around 6% of the enlarged EU's GDP--that they cannot possibly exert any significant effect on the Euro. .
But continuing opposition by EU institutions has led most candidate countries to abandon the idea of adopting the Euro unilaterally or as quickly as possible after entering the Union. .
Unfortunately, the stubbornness of the ECB and the European Commission is now providing ammunition to populist governments in accession countries that are counting on currency appreciation to escape the fiscal discipline that adopting the Euro would imply. .
Saved by Taxes .
What do we owe to our great-great-great-grandchildren? .
What actions are we obligated to take now in order to diminish the risks to our descendants and our planet from the increasing likelihood of global warming and climate change? .
Almost everyone -- except the likes of ExxonMobil, US Vice President Dick Cheney, and their paid servants and deluded acolytes -- understands that when humans burn hydrocarbons, carbon dioxide goes into the atmosphere, where it acts like a giant blanket, absorbing infrared radiation coming up from below and warming the earth. .
Likewise, almost everyone understands that while global warming might be a much smaller or larger problem than existing models suggest, this uncertainty is no excuse for inaction. .
In fact, uncertainty about global climate change should lead us to do more to guard against it than if we knew it would proceed exactly according to the central-case projections. .
Finally, almost everyone agrees that governments, non-profit institutions, and energy companies should be spending far more to develop technologies that generate non-carbon-emitting power, that remove it from the atmosphere to forests or oceans, and that cool the earth by reflecting more of the sunlight that lands on it. .
Clearly, the world's rich countries should carry the burden of dealing with climate change over the next generations. .
After all, they could take an easy, emissions-intensive path to industrialization and wealth. .
Today, China, India, and other developing countries cannot, and it would be unfair to penalize them for that. .
However, such fiscal expansion would probably disqualify a country from entering the Euro any time soon. .
So now is the time to build, not disrupt or impede, the international institutions that will manage our response to global climate change in the years ahead. .
But should we be doing anything else now and in the next decade? .
Economists like to think of things in terms of prices. .
And when economists see behavior that has destructive side effects, we like to tax it. .
Taxation makes individuals feel in their wallets the destruction they are causing. .
Imposing a tax on those who, say, drive low-mileage SUV's is a way of harnessing humanity's collective intelligence to decide when bad side effects are a reason to alter behavior. .
But it has to be the right tax. .
An SUV going ten miles in the city and burning a gallon of gasoline pumps about three kilograms of carbon into the atmosphere. .
Should the extra "global warming" tax be $0.05 a gallon, $0.50 a gallon, or $1.50 a gallon? .
Our views will change as we learn more, but at the moment the size of the tax hinges on a question of moral philosophy: how much do we believe we owe our distant descendents? .
Indeed, the accession countries that have not implemented a currency board have seen their budget deficits surge--exceeding 9% of GDP in Hungary in 2002 and more than 5% in Poland, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia--while large capital inflows have kept their currencies under strong pressure to appreciate. .
The Australian economist John Quiggin has an illuminating discussion on his website ( .
On the other hand, critics point out that the world today is poor: average annual GDP per capita at purchasing power parity is roughly $7,000. .
We expect improved technology and its spread to make the world of 2100, at a 2% annual growth rate, much richer: $50,000 per capita of year-2006 purchasing power. .
So the critics argue that we need the marginal $70 per capita today much more than the richer people of 2100 will need the $500 that they would gain from being spared the effects of global climate change. .
But what the critics often don't say is that the same logic applies to the world today. .
Average annual per capita incomes in the US, Japan, and Western Europe are currently around $40,000, and less than $6,000 for the poorer half of the world's population. .
The same logic that says we need our $70 more than the people of 2100 need an extra $500 dictates that we should tax the world's rich more, as long as each extra $500 in first-world taxes generates as little as an extra $70 in poor countries per capita incomes. .
In short, if the world's rich are stingy today toward our much richer descendants, and if we want to leave our environmental mess to them to deal with, we should be lavish toward the world's poor. .
Likewise, if we are stingy today toward the world's poor, we should be lavish toward our descendents. .
At least, that is what we should do, if our actions are based on some moral principle, rather than that of Leonid Brezhnev: what we have, we hold. .
This trend exposes candidate countries' real economies to precisely the risk of a capital flow reversal and currency crisis that early Euro adoption was meant to eliminate. .
Taking Drug Safety Seriously .
Health hazards -- nuclear reactors, guns, and contaminated foods -- surround all of us, so governments take an active role in limiting these hazards through regulations, which, in many cases, are very successful. .
But the situation is far different concerning the safety of prescription drugs. .
Indeed, as far as protecting the public is concerned, drug safety is the regulator's neglected stepchild. .
The magnitude of the problem is huge. .
In the United States alone, it is estimated that every year up to 100,000 patients die due to serious adverse drug reactions (ADR's). .
If true, drug-induced death would qualify as the fourth or fifth leading cause of death (depending on which mortality estimates are used). .
Moreover, the direct annual hospital costs attributable to ADR's run into the billions of dollars, and this does not include all the suffering that ADR's cause that does not lead to hospitalization (or death). .
The difficulties in determining cause and effect must be acknowledged. .
Whether a patient's death or hospitalization is due to a particular drug, the underlying illness, or a combination of the two can be hard to determine. .
It is ironic that the candidate countries are being lectured to by officials at the ECB and the European Commission on the trade-off between nominal and real convergence. .
But this makes drug safety all the more important. .
Inherent to drug safety is the fact that all drugs, in addition to their benefits, cause harm in certain patients. .
Drug approval and use requires a careful weighing of desirable and undesirable effects. .
These judgments vary, depending on whether they are made by a drug company, which stands to benefit from sales, or a patient at risk of suffering a serious adverse effect. .
Incomplete knowledge complicates this assessment. .
The rush to get new drugs to market often leads to inadequate safety documentation. .
More than half of all approved drugs produce a serious adverse reaction that is not known at the time of regulatory approval. .
For example, when the new class of painkillers called Cox-2 inhibitors was introduced, regulators, physicians, and patients were unaware that these drugs could cause heart attacks and strokes. .
Tens of thousands of innocent patients -- perhaps more -- suffered such ADR's before the first two drugs of this class were withdrawn. .
Proper and complete documentation of harmful drug effects is difficult. .
The objective of growth for the accession countries is apparently the sole imperative in Brussels; macroeconomic stability can wait. .
Spontaneous reporting rates to regulatory agencies are low -- approximately 1% -- and ongoing monitoring is passive in many countries. .
Large budget deficits support growth, but inflation evidently is not a problem. .
If this line of thought sounds familiar, perhaps it is because it (more or less) recapitulates the foundations of the unsustainable planning system with which the accession countries broke at the beginning of the 1990's. .
It was, of course, the embrace of rational, market-driven economic policies by the former communist nations that has brought them to the brink of EU membership. .
So European institutions should abandon their paternalistic approach and take seriously the concerns of accession countries' central bankers about the risks of maintaining their own currencies for a long period during which their economies have to open up completely to capital flows. .
As it is, the ECB and the European Commission are de facto supporting the positions of populist governments in Eastern Europe that are already spending the funds they hope to get in the future from the EU. .
It is high time that EU institutions address more seriously the challenges and opportunities posed by enlargement. .
They can begin by viewing accession countries' early adoption of the Euro more favorably, both for countries with a currency board and for those with floating exchange rates. .
Blair's EU disaster .
When voters in France and the Netherlands turned down the proposal for a Constitution for the European Union, the world knew that the European project was in deep trouble. .
Last week's bruising battle over the medium-term future of the Union's budget has confirmed that verdict with a vengeance. .
It also brought to a sorry close the UK's six-month presidency of the European Council, confirming Britain's long-standing reputation as the odd-man-out in the European Union. .
The two events are intimately connected. .
French and Dutch voters did not say why they voted against the planned Constitution. .
But many commentators believe that they were protesting against what they perceived as the precipitate admission of ten new member states, mainly much poorer countries from Central and Eastern Europe. .
In particular, voters were afraid that their jobs would be lost to hordes of Eastern immigrants, exemplified in the image widely quoted at the time, of the low-cost Polish plumber. .
The irony, of course, was that most of the 15 old member states had refused to give the new members full and immediate access to the Western job markets. .
But in any event, it was too late to protest: the ten Eastern states had already been granted membership of the Union. .
But now the 25 member states must deal with the financial consequences of that enlargement, not just in the overall size of the European Union budget for the next seven years, but in who pays and who benefits. .
In particular, the central issue is how far the old member states are willing to pay to boost the less developed economies of the new members. .
In the event, it turned into a three-way battle between Britain, France and the new member states. .
Traditionally, a large majority of the budget has gone either on agriculture or on the development of backward regions. .
In practice, this has meant large flows of money either to big agricultural producers, like France, or to poorer member states, like Greece and Portugal. .
On both counts, the new member states expected to benefit substantially from the EU system. .
In the past, the big loser from the EU system, in budgetary terms, was the UK; for while agriculture accounted for two thirds of all EU spending, the UK had a small farm sector, and therefore received small farm payments. .
The British long complained of the unfairness of these rules, especially in view of the fact that the UK was one of the relatively poorer member states; and in 1984, Margaret Thatcher's Conservative government demanded, and got, a massive rebate on its net contribution to the EU budget. .
Today, the situation has changed in three important respects. .
EU farm policy has started to be reformed, and its share of the EU budget has fallen from over 60% to 40%; Britain has for several years enjoyed significantly faster economic growth than most other member states, so that it is now one of the richer EU countries, even compared with France and Germany; and the new member states are so much poorer than even the poorest of the old members, that they have an unanswerable moral case for a generous share of whatever budget could be negotiated. .
When negotiations started six months ago, it was Britain's turn to take over the Presidency of the European Council. .
Tony Blair, British Prime Minister, electrified the world of European politics by telling the European Parliament that he was a "passionate pro-European". .
This was a message for which Britain's European friends had long been hoping, and for which they had waited in vain since Blair's election in 1997. .
Certainly, he had never expressed any such sentiment inside the British Isles during the previous eight years. .
Since Britain had been one of the most insistent advocates of enlargement of the EU to the candidates from Central and Eastern Europe, one might have expected that the Blair government would have wished to be correspondingly generous to the new-comers in the conduct of the budgetary negotiations. .
At first, this seemed to be the British government's chosen tactic. .
Against all expectations, it struck a morally advantageous posture by offering to surrender some part of its budget rebate, but only if the rest of the European Union (i.e. France, in particular) would agree to fundamental reforms of EU farm policy. .
It took some time before the British came to understand that since President Jacques Chirac is a beleaguered lame-duck President, who will remain in office but not in power until 2007, he is in no position to agree to any such bargain. .
So when the British came to terms with this harsh reality, they played out the lamentable end-game of their management of the negotiations with small-minded cheese-paring and logic-chopping offers, all designed primarily to safeguard narrow British interests, mainly at the expense of the new member states. .
It is a sad conclusion to a presidency, launched six-months ago, with Blair's claim that he was a "passionate pro-European". .
Yet the full text of his speech tells it all. .
Blair is in favour of Europe; but not this Europe. .
He wants to be a part of a political Europe; but only if the other member states follow Britain's model of economic and social reform. .
The problem is that economic and social reform are purely national responsibilities, and do not lie within the competence of the Union; if there is to be economic and social reform in France and Germany, that is a matter exclusively for French and German voters and politicians. .
It could only be a European matter, if the EU were a real federation. .
Is Blair a federalist, then? .
Heavens, no! .
He is merely an unthinking nationalist, living in terror of the nationalist yellow tabloid press. .
So why does he say he is a passionate pro-European? .
Because he has not thought about the question for one moment. .
Europe's Neo-Liberal Challenge .
For over 20 years I have argued that Western Europe's high unemployment rates are unsustainable. .
At the end of the 1970's, monetarists bet that only a transitory and modest increase in unemployment could rein in the creeping -- and trotting -- inflation of the industrial west, and that in retrospect the cost of returning to effective price stability would be judged worthwhile. .
In Britain and the United States, this monetarist bet turned out well. .
In Western Europe, it did not. .
Over the past 25 years in Europe, unemployment rose as monetary policy was tightened and interest rates were raised to fight inflation. .
But after inflation succumbed, unemployment did not fall -- or not by much. .
If unemployment was not stuck quite at Great Depression levels, it remained high enough to make long-term joblessness or the fear of long-term joblessness a defining experience. .
Societies in which the official unemployment rate stands at 10% or more for generations are societies in which government economic management has failed. .
So, for 20 years it has seemed to me that Western Europe's underlying political equilibrium -- corporatist bargaining and ample social insurance, on the one hand, and tight monetary policies, on the other -- must crack. .
Twin fears appear to be paralyzing European policymakers. .
Europe's central bankers fear that their political masters will order them to loosen monetary policy, that the structural reforms needed to free up aggregate supply will not be forthcoming, and that the result will be a return to the inflation of the 1970's. .
In short, they fear that all of the sacrifices made for price stability will have been in vain. .
West European politicians, for their part, fear the opposite outcome. .
They worry that even after undertaking structural reforms to reduce the attractiveness of unemployment benefits and increase the ability of workers to move to jobs and of firms to move to workers, central bankers will continue to insist on tight money. .
In short, they fear that, with no expansion of output or employment, the net effect will simply be an increase in poverty. .
Of course, these fears are accompanied by the hope that structural reforms and monetary expansion work in harmony, boosting employment and output without raising inflation by much. .
But the reality is that steps toward looser monetary policies are non-existent -- especially with the fledgling European Central Bank anxious to establish its inflation-fighting credibility -- and that steps toward structural reforms are half-hearted, hesitant, and small. .
For 20 years, I have been wrong: West European polities have remained stable despite the exclusion of a large proportion of citizens from meaningful participation in much of economic life. .
West European economies have continued to grow -- albeit not as rapidly as they might have -- despite bearing the heavy burden of the unemployed 10% or more of the labor force. .
Now, though, it looks like I may finally be right -- or at least right to worry, if not to panic. .
The French rejected the European Union constitution, primarily -- or so it appears -- because further European integration, it is feared, must bring in its wake the huge costs and disruptions of neo-liberalism. .
It is one thing to back the "European project" when the idea is to bind Germany so tightly to France that never again will anybody think it worthwhile to wage a war over what language is spoken in Alsace-Lorraine. .
It is another when the European project means that French workers face competition from Polish plumbers, Romanian farmers, and Turkish shop clerks. .
In Germany, the electorate seems poised to eject Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder out of discontent with his tepid allegiance to the neo-liberal project. .
The problem is that the electorate will then get four years of rule by a chancellor, Angela Merkel, whose commitment to the neo-liberal project is almost as strong as mine. .
I think that Germany would be better off in a decade under more neo-liberal policies. .
But this does not seem to be what the German electorate wants, and this makes the complexion of German politics four years from now incalculable. .
Coupled with all this is northern European discontent with the central bankers, specifically with the ECB and the euro. .
It is not that the end of European Monetary Union is on the agenda; it is merely that people have begun thinking about possible low-probability futures in which the end of EMU might be placed on the agenda. .
That is enough to shake asset prices worldwide. .
Western Europe's accomplishments since World War II are among the most heartening and impressive success stories in world history. .
Everyone should want today's undivided Europe to build on these accomplishments, rather than for generations of high unemployment to jeopardize them. .
But this will require a shift in the ECB's attitude. .
Europe needs a monetary policy that views aiding employment growth in northern Europe as more important than continental price stability. .
There will, after all be inflation in southern and eastern Europe -- there must be, for as regions develop and industrialize their terms of trade must improve, and under a monetary union regional inflation is how this can happen. .
The ECB should not try to balance inflation in the south and east with deflation in the north in order to hit artificial continent-wide targets. .
Politicians don't understand science, and rarely seek the advice of scientists and engineers in addressing major issues. .
Everything is viewed as politics and votes, not as technical problems requiring technological expertise, which is why Africa's poverty is so often attributed to corruption rather than to ecological challenges. .
It is easy to dismiss the suggestion that technology can save the day. .
After all, technological advance also requires good governance, market forces, effective universities, and more. .
Politics will still play its role. .
Nevertheless, it's time to recognize that governments are ill-equipped to understand the sophisticated technological challenges and opportunities facing the world, and that new ways are needed to ensure that science and technology are given the prominence needed to address a wide range of increasingly urgent global problems. .
Now is the time for every major international agency and national government to assume responsibility for gaining the scientific and technological expertise that they will need in the twenty-first century. .
Getting Latin America Unstuck .
One of the world economy's biggest puzzles is Latin America's poor performance. .
Since the early 1980's, Latin America has been stuck, with per capita incomes growing slowly (if at all) in most of the region, and with one big crisis following another. .
Here, then, is a modest proposal that applies to all democracies: the marketplace of ideas works better if it is easier for citizens to see the trade-offs between accuracy and entertainment, or between accuracy and party loyalty. .
Wouldn't they be more likely to read pundits with better track records? .
If so, pundits might adapt to accountability by showing more humility, and political debate might begin to sound less shrill. .
Granted, it is not easy to create methods of keeping score that are credible across the spectrum of reasonable opinion. .
But in a world where, as Yeats said, "and the best lack all conviction, while the worst are full of passionate intensity," it is worth trying. .
What Next for Europe? .
In many ways, 2005 has been Europe's annus horibilis. .
It began well, when Spanish voters approved the draft European Union constitution, but it turned sour when French and Dutch voters spurned it soon after. .
Those votes partly reflected displeasure with domestic policies, and partly disappointment with the way governments conduct European affairs. .
Governments promptly obliged with more of the same. .
Many policies have been tried, especially trade liberalization, privatization of inefficient state enterprises, and budgetary reforms. .
Within days of the votes, they failed to agree on the EU budget for 2007-13. .
French and British leaders engaged in a heated quarrel that derailed the subsequent summit, before Britain assumed the rotating six-month EU presidency in July. .
Normally, countries use their EU presidencies to display their ability to solve problems and move the Union forward. .
But, as of early December, Britain has remained dormant. .
Besides burying the draft constitution, it has largely sidestepped the budget issue. .
Chances that it gets the budget approved this year are slim, and, unless the dispute is resolved soon, the Union will not have an operational budget by 2007. .
Even if a budget is adopted, there is no lack of depressing business for the Austrian presidency, which starts on January 1. .
The deepest problem is Europe's inability to grow at more than a snail's pace and to provide jobs to its citizens. .
This is mostly due to the Big Three -- France, Germany, and Italy -- which produce 70% of Europe's GDP. .
The collective response, adopted in 2000, has been the "Lisbon Strategy," which aims at making the EU "the most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy in the world" by 2010. .
Yet something is holding Latin America back. .
More realistically, it is designed to provide governments with the incentive to undertake the reforms that stimulate economic growth and productivity. .
That means facing down the myriad interest groups -- from industry lobbies to trade unions and entrenched bureaucracies -- that have (so far) successfully protected their turfs. .
The strategy rests on peer pressure, naming and shaming governments that fail to make progress. .
In practice, however, peer pressure has become peer collusion. .
When EU leaders met last spring to assess progress, they pitifully recognized that the Lisbon Strategy's goal was unlikely to be met. .
The best that they could do now would be to dump the pretense of a strategy and carry on with the other business. .
Unfortunately, the host of the 2000 summit was José Manuel Barroso, then Prime Minister of Portugal and current President of the European Commission, who has staked his presidency on the Lisbon Strategy. .
Expect him to push on hopelessly. .
One of the few good ideas contained in the Lisbon Strategy was to remove barriers to trade in services. .
Intra-European competition in services is restricted by innumerable national regulations that, for instance, strictly determine the requirements for becoming a hairdresser or a plumber. .
The lack of vigorous growth is all the more bewildering in view of Latin America's many advantages and social successes. .
One of the defining features of the past decades is the sharp increase in services productivity in the US; none of that happened in Europe. .
Guess why. .
Because services account for 70% of European GDP, the potential impact from enhanced competition is substantial. .
But removing protection is always politically difficult. .
The European Commission submitted a proposal in 2005 -- just as the constitution was being put up for a vote. .
Not surprisingly, the proposal was quickly shelved. .
Now, with countless private interest groups trying to water it down into irrelevance, the battle will be firmly on the EU's agenda in 2006. .
At the same time, Europe is again blocking progress in the Doha round of world trade talks, with the farmers' lobby fighting to preserve its subsidies. .
Many governments are so fearful of their farmers that they see no other option than to hold their ground, no matter what. .
Europe has agreed to a single trade policy. .
Natural resources are plentiful, with vast amounts of fertile land. .
When disagreements run as deep as they do on agriculture, there can be no give-and-take of the kind that allows for successful negotiations. .
There is little reason for optimism. .
And what next for the ECB, which has just nudged up interest rates by 0.25%, after 30 months on hold. .
Experts can disagree about whether the move was premature, but no one agrees with the many political leaders who have argued that the tiny hike will derail the timid resumption of economic growth. .
The sharpness of political attacks on the ECB might trigger dangerous talk about restricting its independence. .
While such a move is out of the question -- it would require a change in the European Treaty -- the noise is unhealthy. .
It distracts the ECB, adds to the impression that Europe is bad, and, more importantly, will be used by ineffective governments as a scapegoat for their failings. .
Expect more ECB-bashing. .
Is Europe stuck? .
The current team of leaders has been an enormous disappointment. .
Health conditions are reasonably good, and all Latin American countries have made headway against illiteracy, with most reaching 90% adult literacy or higher. .
But as they fade away, there could be some light at the end of the tunnel. .
Moreover, fertility rates have fallen sharply, to a point where populations in many countries will probably level off in coming decades. .
Women's status has improved, and girls enjoy equal access to education, with even higher enrollment rates than boys in many countries. .
Latin America may be known for its "macho" culture, but women increasingly participate in the labor force and attain prominent political and social positions. .
Latin America boasts still other long-term advantages. .
Most people live near the coasts, with good access to international trade, and most live in cities - another advantage for growth. .
Indeed, the region is not poor by international standards, but rather stuck in the middle-income range between the world's poorest places and the high-income countries of North America, Europe, and East Asia. .
What, then, accounts for the puzzling lack of real growth over the past 25 years? .
I blame two unsolved, but solvable, problems. .
The first has been around for centuries: the social divisions that trace their origins back to the European conquest over Native Americans in the sixteenth century. .
More than most places, Latin America was born in violent conquest. .
Europeans subdued Amerindian populations and also brought in massive numbers of slaves from Africa, especially to the Caribbean basin and Brazil. .
Societies became racially and ethnically complex, as the European, Amerindian, and African populations intermarried, but the long-term trend of European dominance, indigenous and Afro-American subservience, and entrenched poverty became a scar on Latin American societies. .
Even today, income inequality in Latin America is among the highest in the world, reflecting the old patterns of ethnic and racial division. .
Income inequality casts a long shadow. .
The rich have long fought against taxation needed to increase investment in the education and health of the poor, perpetuating deep social divisions and leaving many people without the health and skills that global competitiveness requires. .
The situation today is improving in some places - such as Brazil - which augurs well for the future. .
In other places - for example, Guatemala and parts of the Andean region - social divisions remain fraught with violence and distrust. .
Beyond this, a basic failure of economic strategy has been largely overlooked, one that is reflected in a major difference between public policy discussions in Latin America and Asia. .
In Asia, public debate is about technology: how can Asia catch up? .
Asian governments relentlessly act to raise the scientific and technological capacities of their economies. .
In Latin America, the global technological revolution is much less discussed, and national policies to promote science and technology are rarely given prominence. .
The result is that Latin America has failed to benefit adequately from the global technological revolutions. .
Asian developing countries are now producers of computers, semiconductors, pharmaceuticals, and software. .
By contrast, even Latin America's star performer, Chile, remains largely a resource-based export economy, with a heavy concentration in copper and agricultural exports. .
These sectors are technologically sophisticated, but form a narrow base for long-term development. .
The situation is far from hopeless. .
Brazil has demonstrated the ability to be a technological export power. .
It has succeeded, notably, in exporting airplanes and many consumer durable goods. .
Mexico, too, has begun to mobilize significant technological prowess. .
Argentina, Chile, and other countries could become high-tech agricultural producers, in the forefront of agro-biotechnology for example, if they put their minds to it. .
Still, Latin American countries have not yet tried to foster a technological revolution, certainly not with the focus, skill, commitment, and financing that Asian countries have shown. .
Such a push could play a major role in jump-starting economic growth. .
Such a policy would entail committing to a major increase in spending on research and development, as Asian developing countries have done. .
Latin American countries should aim to increase spending to around 2% of GNP (from 0.5% currently), partly through public support for laboratories and universities and partly through incentives for private-sector R&D. They should roll out the red carpet for high-tech multinational firms, just as Asia has done. .
They should also increase their focus on scientific and technological training and encourage a higher proportion of students to go on to university education. .
We are, however, still not a global village. .
After first disputing that there was scientific evidence of the problem, the largest polluter in the world, the US, is now simply refusing to do anything about it (other than preaching voluntary restraint—of which there is little evidence, at least in America). .
The international community has yet to figure out what to do with an aberrant member who fails to live up to its responsibilities as a global citizen. .
Optimists say that technology will solve the problem. .
Realists observe that in the long race between the environment and technology, it appears that technology has so far been losing. .
Nature, as we have learned from the tsunami, has its own timetable. .
Unless we learn how to respect it, we will all miss the boat. .
How Accurate Are Your Pet Pundits? .
Every day, experts bombard us with their views on topics as varied as Iraqi insurgents, Bolivian coca growers, European central bankers, and North Korea's Politburo. .
But how much credibility should we attach to the opinions of experts? .
The sanguine view is that as long as those selling expertise compete vigorously for the attention of discriminating buyers (the mass media), market mechanisms will assure quality control. .
Pundits who make it into newspaper opinion pages or onto television and radio must have good track records; otherwise, they would have been weeded out. .
Skeptics, however, warn that the mass media dictate the voices we hear and are less interested in reasoned debate than in catering to popular prejudices. .
As a result, fame could be negatively, not positively, correlated with long-run accuracy. .
Until recently, no one knew who is right, because no one was keeping score. .
But the results of a 20-year research project now suggest that the skeptics are closer to the truth. .
I describe the project in detail in my book Expert Political Judgment: How good is it? .
How can we know? .
The basic idea was to solicit thousands of predictions from hundreds of experts about the fates of dozens of countries, and then score the predictions for accuracy. .
We find that the media not only fail to weed out bad ideas, but that they often favor bad ideas, especially when the truth is too messy to be packaged neatly. .
The evidence falls into two categories. .
First, as the skeptics warned, when hordes of pundits are jostling for the limelight, many are tempted to claim that they know more than they do. .
Boom and doom pundits are the most reliable over-claimers. .
Between 1985 and 2005, boomsters made 10-year forecasts that exaggerated the chances of big positive changes in both financial markets (e.g., a Dow Jones Industrial Average of 36,000) and world politics (e.g., tranquility in the Middle East and dynamic growth in sub-Saharan Africa). .
They assigned probabilities of 65% to rosy scenarios that materialized only 15% of the time. .
In the same period, doomsters performed even more poorly, exaggerating the chances of negative changes in all the same places where boomsters accentuated the positive, plus several more (I still await the impending disintegration of Canada, Nigeria, India, Indonesia, South Africa, Belgium, and Sudan). .
They assigned probabilities of 70% to bleak scenarios that materialized only 12% of the time. .
Second, again as the skeptics warned, over-claimers rarely pay penalties for being wrong. .
Indeed, the media shower lavish attention on over-claimers while neglecting their humbler colleagues. .
We can see this process in sharp relief when, following the philosopher Sir Isaiah Berlin, we classify experts as "hedgehogs" or "foxes." .
Hedgehogs are big-idea thinkers in love with grand theories: libertarianism, Marxism, environmentalism, etc. .
Their self-confidence can be infectious. .
They know how to stoke momentum in an argument by multiplying reasons why they are right and others are wrong. .
That wins them media acclaim. .
But they don't know when to slam the mental brakes by making concessions to other points of view. .
They take their theories too seriously. .
The result: hedgehogs make more mistakes, but they pile up more hits on Google. .
Eclectic foxes are better at curbing their ideological enthusiasms. .
They are comfortable with protracted uncertainty about who is right even in bitter debates, conceding gaps in their knowledge and granting legitimacy to opposing views. .
They sprinkle their conversations with linguistic qualifiers that limit the reach of their arguments: ‘but,' ‘however,' ‘although.' .
Because they avoid over-simplification, foxes make fewer mistakes. .
Foxes will often agree with hedgehogs up to a point, before complicating things: "Yes, my colleague is right that the Saudi monarchy is vulnerable, but remember that coups are rare and that the government commands many means of squelching opposition." .
Imagine your job as a media executive depends on expanding your viewing audience. .
Whom would you pick: an expert who balances conflicting arguments and concludes that the likeliest outcome is more of the same, or an expert who gets viewers on the edge of their seats over radical Islamists seizing control and causing oil prices to soar? .
In short, the qualities that make foxes more accurate also make them less popular. .
At this point, uncharitable skeptics chortle that we get the media we deserve. .
But that is unfair. .
No society has yet created a widely trusted method for keeping score on the punditocracy. .
Even citizens who prize accuracy have little way of knowing that they are sacrificing it when they switch channels from boring foxes to charismatic hedgehogs. .
Unfortunately, the research program was cancelled before its findings could be applied in the business world, almost certainly because it threatened large companies. .
It is often forgotten that US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld emerged from a comfortable retirement to reorganize the American military into a smaller, more agile force, using some of these same insights. .
But the planning for the Iraq invasion, in which Rumsfeld advocated the use of fewer troops than advised, suggests a poor understanding of distributed systems. .
While the forces were deployed for a flexible entry and withdrawal, the Bush administration ended up using them for an old-fashioned occupation. .
Terrorists have been better at capitalizing on models of distributed operation. .
Scores of texts are appearing in the Muslim world on jihadi strategic studies. .
The best known in the West is The Management of Savagery , but only because it was translated and made public. .
These books (and the trends they indicate) are becoming less dogmatic and increasingly sophisticated in the adoption of modern management techniques. .
Their research surely includes the young science of virtual enterprise management: how to nurture and support self-organizing cells. .
Perhaps the first lesson for Western policymakers is that virtual enterprises run on a culture of trust. .
Michael Tilson Thomas in San Francisco, for example, has combined effective fundraising and artistic leadership to propel the San Francisco Symphony to the top rank of US orchestras. .
It also should be reassuring to Europeans who are concerned that greater reliance on private money necessarily means conservative programming that the San Francisco Symphony has one of the most adventuresome repertoires in the US. .
If the audience has progressive tastes, private money and innovative programming are entirely compatible. .
A corollary is that public money makes it possible for adventuresome programming even if audience tastes run to the conservative side. .
This is one reason performing artists in Europe like public money -- it liberates them from a diet of only Beethoven and Mozart. .
Moreover, the audience may come to appreciate an adventuresome repertoire the more it becomes exposed to it. .
Of course, with reduced public spending on the performing arts, not only will there be greater reliance on private money, but ticket prices will have to rise as well. .
Some argue that this is a bad thing, because they prefer queuing to the price system and fear that higher prices will compromise future audiences by excluding young people. .
But cheap prices for the performing arts do not solve the thorny problem of access for youth. .
First, youth may not take advantage of cheap tickets to the extent that they are not interested in going to hear live classical music at any price. .
Some kinds of trust can be based on an artificial notion of "not us" rather than on real values and direct experience. .
Second, even if they do want to go, they may not be able to get seats, which often are not available because subscriptions stay in the same hands year after year. .
What good are cheap prices, which serve mainly to subsidize the same subscription holders, if there are no seats? .
If a taste for classical music is to be subsidized, some more targeted subsidies should be preferred to cheap prices. .
The best way to bring youth to the performing arts is through education. .
Because American orchestras can't count on schools or government to provide the basic music education necessary to ensure a continuing audience for classical music, some orchestras are doing it themselves with private money. .
In San Francisco, for example, the Symphony runs a $23 million privately funded project -- called Keeping Score -- that includes a national public television series, radio shows, interactive music learning, and school music programs. .
This type of innovative program is relevant for European as well as American orchestras. .
The problem of youth and access to the performing arts exists on both sides of the Atlantic. .
So does poor music education in state schools. .
If orchestras don't look after their own futures, they may well not have one to look after. .
That is why the Bush administration's actions actually strengthen the virtual terrorist enterprise dynamic. .
Law and Order, Russian-Style .
Around the world, people worry that political freedom is disappearing in Vladimir Putin's Russia. .
Indeed, about the only people who are unconcerned about creeping authoritarianism in Russia are the Russians themselves. .
Russians seem to care less about political freedom than they do about social welfare - pensions, domestic violence, children's rights, or police brutality. .
In fact, most Russians are indifferent to the government's efforts to curtail press freedom and limit the right to protest. .
Such apathy makes my task as Russia's ombudsman, an office charged by the State Duma (parliament) with protecting political rights in Russia, difficult, if not impossible. .
The ombudsman acts as a bridge between the authorities and the people, seeking to resolve conflicts that arise between state bodies and citizens. .
My office is open not only to Russian citizens, but to foreigners and stateless people who feel their political rights have been compromised. .
The standards we apply are not only those contained in Russia's constitution, but also international legal principles and human rights norms, even if they sometimes contradict our constitution. .
For example, as ombudsman, I was opposed to curtailing the right of Russians to jury trials. .
Bush's "us and them" rhetoric clearly defines an "other" and positions it as a cohesive enemy. .
Those who wanted to limit the use of juries supposedly feared a risk to state security in some instances. .
My office worked closely with the state to assure that, in most cases, juries are used. .
Similarly, my office defended the liberal weekly newspaper Novoe Vremya (New Times), which was being pressured by Moscow's city government on the pretext of a commercial dispute about a lease. .
That fight is not over, but after my intervention, Moscow's authorities must take into account the public's negative attitude to their effort to quash this publication. .
Of course, Russia provides far more headline-grabbling examples of political and human rights problems, such as the low-grade war in Chechnya or the Yukos affair. .
My office pays maximum attention to Chechnya, although this is not easy to do from Moscow. .
Indeed, I could spend all my time in Chechnya, but Russia has 89 regions with countless human rights issues to address. .
This is why I suggested to Putin that Chechnya have its own regional rights ombudsman who would spend all his time there. .
The new Chechen authorities seem to welcome this prospect. .
As to the Yukos affair, my office cannot intervene in any legal process until it is completed. .
His "war" approach is making it easier for Islamist terrorists to view the West as an equally united and malevolent force. .
Former Yukos CEO Mikhail Khodorkovsky's lawyers have sent a complaint to the European Court for Human Rights in Strasbourg. .
If Khodorkovsky disagrees with the final decision of the Russian courts, he will undoubtedly appeal to that court. .
Only then will I be able to express an opinion. .
Many observers nonetheless insist that those under criminal investigation should be released on bail instead of being kept in prison. .
Others say that this is not an option in Khodorkovsky's case - being very rich, he could easily jump bail and flee abroad. .
In fact, this is precisely what happened with other figures accused in the Yukos case. .
All of these serious human rights questions expose the fact that Russia's legal institutions remains half-formed. .
For example, the Duma has taken far too long to enact a law on lobbying, which in most developed democracies clearly defines what constitutes acceptable and unacceptable behavior. .
Khodorkovsky might not be in as much trouble if such precise laws existed. .
Unformed laws are directly related to unformed ideas. .
In the future, the virtual enterprise model will shape how business is conducted, wars will be fought and probably how government services will be administered. .
Human rights in Russia are often violated simply because people are not aware that they have some particular right. .
It promises to decouple the management of finance from that of production, implying faster innovation and economic growth. .
However, if Western governments do not develop a deep understanding of how these structures operate, they stand no chance of combating the agile terrorist enterprise. .
Expansion is Solidarity .
Nowadays it is often alleged that the European Union's sense of solidarity was put in jeopardy, if not shattered outright, by its enlargement to take in the countries of central and eastern Europe. .
As Bulgaria and Romania come closer to membership, and with accession talks with Turkey and Croatia set to begin, it has become increasingly important to challenge that view. .
The values and interests of the EU's newest member states coincide in most ways with those of the 15 earlier members. .
It is, of course, true that enlargement has fundamentally changed the Union and given rise to new problems and policy concerns. .
But the new member states in central and eastern Europe are deeply embedded in the economic, social, and cultural development of our Continent. .
The ties that bind us together were frayed by forty years of Soviet domination, but this did not fundamentally change these states' European character. .
My country, Poland, has always had deep cultural ties to other European countries, especially France. .
We participated in all the major developments in European music, literature, and film (think of Andrzej Wajda's films from the Solidarity era, such as "Danton," which were French co-productions). .
Even in sport, East Europeans have long been integrated with the rest of Europe. .
Indeed, before World War I the German national football team consisted entirely of players with Polish names. .
But, above all, there is a deep sense among Poles, Hungarians, Czechs, and others, that they are Europeans. .
This is the very meaning of the word "solidarity," as defined in the Oxford English Dictionary: "unity resulting from feelings and sympathies." .
Solidarity, in the sense of unity resulting from common interests, also clearly exists within both the original EU-15 and the enlarged Union. .
The exceptions prove the rule. .
The EU's disunity over the war in Iraq should not overshadow its member states' agreement on almost all other great questions of international affairs. .
In economic matters, disagreements on, say, a single EU regulation should not be allowed to mask the fact that no member state, new or old, has ever contested the internal market. .
Finally, the enlargement process itself is also manifestly a symbol of European social, civic, and cultural unity. .
The fact that it provoked debate and dispute does not detract from the conviction shared by old and new member states that they had an obligation to rebuild the Continent after 40 years of division. .
But there are concerns that, if not fundamentally divisive, are worrying. .
Should we fear the fact that Europe is no longer a purely Jewish/Christian and white continent? .
Will EU citizens whose origins are in other continents and whose religion is Hindu or Islam, Sikh or Buddhist, be able to identify with "European" values and culture? .
Will they be able to feel European, like the Poles or the Czechs have always felt? .
These questions apply most pointedly -- indeed, they cannot be avoided -- in the case of Turkey's possible accession to the EU. .
Is European integration animated by respect for another's values? .
Is it about sharing them or about contributing to them? .
These are obviously knotty questions. .
They are particularly difficult if we see culture as the cement of Europe's future. .
All European countries probably believed at the outset that non-European newcomers could be assimilated in the same way that Polish immigrants were assimilated into Germany's Ruhr region in the nineteenth century. .
That this has not happened, at least on a large scale, is not to say that it cannot happen at all. .
Look at the growing number of prominent citizens of Turkish origin in Germany. .
Consider the many second generation Indian and Pakistani Britons who are now seen in business suits carrying laptop computers and flying around the world. .
But Europeans must admit that these individuals represent a small minority. .
Many immigrant groups in Europe find themselves flung back on their own communities by the impossibility of social and economic integration. .
The constant threat of terrorism has made this isolation even more dramatic for the Europe's Islamic populations. .
The EU cannot simply proclaim "solidarity" as a core value and then do nothing to foster it among those who feel marginalized. .
They, too, must be allowed to feel those ties of "unity resulting from feelings and sympathy." .
European solidarity cannot and will not survive their neglect. .
After Kyoto .
The Kyoto Protocol treaty has now entered into force for the 126 nations who have joined it so far. .
Now is the time to start thinking about how to engage all nations, including large emitters, in conversations about what to do after the treaty's expiration in 2012. .
This is exactly what the European Commission did recently by providing its first strategy for a post-Kyoto era, which will be discussed by the European Council next March. .
While the Kyoto Protocol represents only a modest reduction of carbon emissions in industrialized countries -- 5.2% between 2008-2012 relative to 1990 levels, with varying targets for individual countries -- real progress can be made in sustaining development efforts and preserving our planet. .
But first, all countries must integrate climate concerns into policy planning, and improve their governance in key sectors such as energy, infrastructure, and transport. .
In other words, we must act in accordance with the recognition that climate change and its effects on people in both rich and poor countries remains a threat to global security. .
At the end of the day, the long-term approach is likely to include a rules-based system, an incentives system, and investments in technology change. .
Increasingly, adaptation at the national level will be recognized as a major issue that will require appropriate funding. .
Dealing with the impacts of climate change and with emission reductions should not be mutually exclusive, but complementary. .
Looking ahead to the post-Kyoto world offers us the chance to start a new dialogue and to look at new options on climate change. .
Nations could set the more ambitious goal of limiting the long-term change in the earth's temperature, and then assign emissions rights among countries in such a way that will eventually limit temperature increases to an acceptable level. .
This would require increasing investments in energy research and development for new and improved technologies -- a process that needs to be supported by stronger public-private partnerships. .
Up to now, with only 15% of the world's population, rich countries have been responsible for more than 75% of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, and thus most of the environmental damage. .
However, it is the developing countries -- and thus the world's poor -- who are most vulnerable. .
It is unrealistic to ask poor countries, where more than 1.6 billion people do not have access to clean energy and technologies, to bear the costs associated with the much needed technological change. .
Working with partners, the World Bank is supporting financial strategies to assist developing countries in meeting the costs caused by climate change. .
To date, over $1 billion dollars in Global Environment Facility (GEF) grants, together with about $8 billion in co-financing, have been committed to programs related to climate change. .
While the regulatory mechanisms of both Kyoto and the European Trading Scheme have contributed to the establishment of an emerging market for carbon trading, interested parties are now concerned about the immediate future. .
Without a regulatory framework beyond 2012, the window of opportunity for initiating project-based transactions will close by 2006/2007. .
Given the long lead time between project preparation and the first benefits of emissions reductions, project developers have only a few years to act before carbon payments cease to make a meaningful contribution to project finance in the current context. .
Developing infrastructure projects is a long process that requires 3-7 years from identification, through licensing, financing, and construction, and finally to the first certification of carbon emission reductions. .
Therefore, projects need to be operational at the latest by 2007. .
The World Bank has been instrumental in advancing carbon finance as a viable development tool, and in facilitating private-sector participation in the market. .
The Bank is focused on representing the interests of its borrowing countries, helping them to develop assets for carbon trading according to their own priorities. .
But, without a commitment by governments to limit greenhouse gas emissions beyond 2012, the carbon market will remain uncertain, and the private sector -- vital to the market's success -- is unlikely to expand its participation in a meaningful and sustained way. .
According to a recent World Bank-supported survey of companies interested in carbon finance, only one in five respondents declared that they were interested in buying post-2012 emissions reductions. .
Now is the chance to look forward and enlist the global community -- with no exclusions, although with differentiated responsibilities -- in the pursuit of a more secure world, one that avoids the dire risks of environmental degradation and social conflict implied by inaction. .
State of the Art, or Art of the State? .
September is traditionally the time when opera companies and orchestras return to their home cities from Aix, Salzburg, Tanglewood, and countless other summer festivals. .
This rentrée is also marked (on both sides of the Atlantic) by the return of worries about how classical music is financed. .
American symphonic life is Euro-centric in almost every respect except for its funding. .
Whereas Americans depend upon tax-deductible private donations and box office receipts to finance live classical music, Europeans prefer direct government support for the arts. .
Ironically, while arts advocates in the United States have long argued for adoption of the "European model" -- which has produced a rich and varied artistic life for Europeans -- Europe is being forced to change its system of support to one that depends more on private money and the box office. .
Unfortunately, Europe's system of direct government financial support is falling victim to Europe's slow economic growth and budget deficits. .
Particularly for those countries that have adopted the euro, government spending on the arts will be constrained for some time by the requirement that fiscal deficits be kept to 3% of GDP. .
The resulting pressure on Europe's performing arts institutions is causing concern at various different levels. .
Traditionally, Europe's social democracies have preferred allocating scarce goods and services like concerts and operas by queues (financed by huge subsidies to keep prices low) rather than by willingness to pay. .
Now, this will change. .
Performing arts advocates in Europe point to the US where, among other things, music directors of even major orchestras are now expected to fully participate in fundraising activities and be active in the local community on the orchestras behalf. .
The same thing, they fear, will happen in Europe. .
Some conductors, not wanting to carry a tin cup as they wave their batons, have rejected important posts in the US for this reason, feeling that it would interfere with their art. .
Daniel Barenboim is rumored to have left the Chicago Symphony Orchestra in part because he objected to the fundraising demands that were being made of him. .
But US experience shows that getting artistic leaders like orchestra music directors to participate in fundraising need not be bad for the artistic side of the job. .
By announcing its determination to go ahead with a distant NMD, the US has created political turbulence which it must address now if major damage is to be avoided. .
The New Baby Boomers .
Alienated and unemployed youth are a concern everywhere. .
They pose a particular challenge in the developing world, where a demographic bulge equal to the great "baby boom" that occurred in the West at the end of World War II is growing. .
But the post-war era in the world's most developed countries was one of unprecedented prosperity for the baby boom generation, which is now nearing retirement. .
Will the future be as promising for the developing world's billion-plus young people between the ages of 12 and 24? .
Throughout the developing world, governments urgently need to devise the right mix of investments and policies to encourage their young people to get an education, find work, stay healthy, form families, and exercise citizenship. .
The payoff is huge if they get it right: accelerated development as economies reap the benefits of a burgeoning working-age population and lower dependency ratios. .
In East Asia, this "demographic dividend" is believed to have generated more than a quarter of the region's economic growth. .
Developing countries have already invested heavily in children. .
The research noted the conditions and triggers needed to facilitate the self-assembly of small opportunistic groups and enable them to act like large companies. .
The most important strategic goal of my office is that people learn how to defend their rights better, and to make the authorities take the complaints of ordinary Russians into consideration. .
Sadly, most bureaucrats still look upon human rights values with disdain. .
But the real problem for my office is neither ignorance nor legal infirmity, it is that in an under-developed legal system such as Russia's, my authority is mostly personal, and requires help from the mass media. .
Because concepts of human rights remain rudimentary, the best that can be hoped for is that awareness will slowly begin to take hold. .
My tactical goal is thus to raise the public profile of the ombudsman's office, in order to win more respect and recognition by both citizens and the state. .
This will be all but impossible without cooperation with non-governmental human rights organizations in Russia. .
Indeed, I view one of my tasks as being to facilitate contacts between these groups and the authorities. .
The government's response to these efforts will be an important indicator of whether and to what extent Putin's administration intends to include human and political rights within its so-called "dictatorship of law." .
The Revolutionary Conservative Pope .
Their young people are therefore better-educated and healthier than previous generations. .
Twenty-five years ago, Poland's people were stunned by the choice of their compatriot, Cardinal Karol Wojtyla of Cracow, as Pope. .
Some were frightened, others wept with joy. .
Here, said a prominent writer, was "Poland's second baptism." .
But even in our euphoria, we did not expect how much the new Pope would change not only Poland, but the world. .
His first return visit to his native country soon afterwards showed to all the world the new Pope's power. .
Communist police disappeared from the main streets of Warsaw, yet the streets became models of order. .
After decades of disempowerment, Poles suddenly regained their capacity for self-determination. .
In saying aloud that "there can be no just Europe without an independent Poland on its map," the Pope effectively swept away the unjust postwar settlement that had subjugated Poland to Soviet power. .
Then, in Auschwitz, the Pope said: "I speak in the name of everyone whose rights go unrecognized and violated anywhere in the world, I speak because I am bound, we are all bound, by truth." .
On that spot, that Golgotha of modern times, he called the Poles, who remembered dear ones gassed to death in Auschwitz's crematoria as well as those frozen into glass in Siberia's concentration camps, to a brotherhood devoted to struggle against even justified hatred and revenge. .
More than 80% of children now attend primary school, up from 50% in 1970, and infant mortality has fallen from more than 10% to 6.5% over the same period. .
Some see in the Pope the person responsible for a religious revival; others see a man of peace. .
Some see a defender of the poor, others a critic of liberation theology. .
For the people of Poland, John Paul II, by making human rights the central subject of his teaching, will forever be the man who gave us courage and hope, who restored our historical identity. .
Indeed, the central feature of the first decade of the Pope's reign was his struggle against dictatorship--Communist dictatorship in particular. .
The strategy formulated by the Pope for the Catholic Church, and his ability to mobilize millions of believers in its cause, meant that no one could ever again repeat Stalin's question: "How many divisions does the Pope have?" .
John Paul II demonstrated that moral force was a weapon potent enough to undo Yalta's division of the world. .
Perhaps in part because of their strong anticommunist stance, the Polish Church and John Paul II are often branded as "conservative." .
The accusation is meant to suggest that the Church cannot live comfortably with a pluralist democracy. .
To be sure, in the struggle against Communism, the Polish Church was, indeed, conservative--and thank God for that! .
It was conservative in its absolute fidelity to evangelical values, to the truth of faith, to its historical identity. .
But now governments must go beyond investments in children and begin supporting the new generation of young people. .
For the system of official atheism and legalized mendacity, the Church was a living rebuke. .
With Communism gone, however, the problem confronted by John Paul II and his Church today is this: in what language can evangelical values be articulated in a world where evil is not incarnated in a political system but is diffused in individual souls? .
What is the Pope's message for the postcommunist world he helped create? .
John Paul II undoubtedly keeps a distance from liberal economic ideas and the liberal state, which he often charges with permissiveness and moral relativism. .
A critique of individualism in the name of collective values occurs frequently in the Pope's pronouncements. .
He sees the failings of liberalism as particularly pernicious in postcommunist countries. .
The market economy, despite its practical achievements, seems to him oftentimes to lack a heart and a human face. .
He sees the market as favoring entrepreneurship over human solidarity. .
So John Paul II is no enthusiast of modern Western civilization, with its divorce from the world of values, and he contrasts with it the moral sensitivity of societies with fresh memories of decades of dictatorship. .
Like Alexander Solzhenitsyn, the Pope tends to believe that it was above all in resistance to totalitarianism that man could become truly free and preserve the fundamental values of civilization. .
Indeed, even in countries with high primary-school completion rates, many young people do not attend secondary school. .
I confess that I view the heritage of Communism with more skepticism. .
Totalitarian pressure did, indeed, form exceptional people such as John Paul II and Alexander Solzhenitsyn, people for whom religious faith bought freedom from mendacity and solitude. .
But it did the same for Andrei Sakharov and Vaclav Havel, who defended their supreme values with reference to, and in the language of, lay humanism. .
For most people, however, life under totalitarian dictatorship was not ennobling; it was, rather, a daily immersion in lies, spiritual depravity, and material corruption. .
This is why postcommunist societies do not demonstrate any nobility or disinterestedness that seriously contrasts with the West. .
Communism's defeat left a huge black hole in communities' souls, which is now being filled with nationalism, bigotry, and Western consumerism. .
But John Paul II's basic intuition is correct: the postcommunist world--East and West--is in spiritual crisis, and the Pope wants to shake it into realizing the importance of higher values. .
Indeed, by his words and example, the Pope disrupts the world: it wants to live in wealth and comfort; he reminds us that we must also live in dignity. .
In the end, John Paul II does not fit neatly into any category and often represents a meeting of opposites: rejection of compromise with ecumenism, toughness with warmth, intellectual openness with insistence on theological orthodoxy. .
He is a conservative who loves freedom and a "peacemonger" who condemns injustice, but who reminds us that mercy is more important than justice. .
Young people account for half of all new HIV infections. .
In this, he personifies the paradox that is Christianity: unbreakable and lasting principles joined by understanding and tolerance. .
And, in the Middle East and North Africa region, about a quarter of all young people are unemployed. .
These problems raise thorny questions: What prevents more young people from attending secondary school? .
Is it because they are sometimes close to being illiterate even after primary school, or because it is unaffordable? .
Why don't more young people learn how to lower the risk of getting HIV/AIDS? .
Why do businesses in these countries complain of a lack of skilled workers when so many university students are jobless? .
To build successful youth-friendly policies, governments need to focus on three policy areas: expanding opportunities, enhancing capabilities, and providing second chances for young people. .
Governments must broaden opportunities for young people by improving access to, and the quality of, health and educational services. .
We know that the full benefit of primary school is realized only when children go on to secondary school. .
Yet many young people are ill prepared for secondary school, and places are scarce. .
Today's employers want highly skilled workers. .
More than 20% of all firms, in countries as diverse as Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Estonia, and Zambia, rate inadequate skills and education of workers as a major or a severe obstacle. .
If young people are not to become stuck in dead-end jobs, or end up without jobs at all, they need better education and skills that match those needed by employers. .
Several countries now facilitate access to secondary schooling, in particular through "conditional cash transfer programs," which offer a stipend to poor families whose children regularly attend school. .
These programs have successfully increased secondary school enrollment in countries like Mexico, Ecuador, Bangladesh, and Cambodia. .
For these programs to work, however, children must be ready to enter secondary education. .
Yet, in Morocco, for example, more than 80% of school children complete primary school, but fewer than 20% have mastered the material. .
Second, policies should support young people as they strive to make good decisions. .
Governments cannot substitute for parents or for communities, but they can encourage young people and their families to invest in themselves. .
Armed with the right information and incentives, young people can make better decisions about their health and education. .
In Cameroon, Horizon Jeunes, a reproductive health program that targets urban youth, increased young people's knowledge of reproductive health and successfully changed their behavior, with condom use among females increasing from 58% to 76% in the treatment group. .
Similarly, the rate at which eighth graders from the Dominican Republic entered upper secondary levels increased when they were simply told how much more those who finished high school earned -- an amount they had vastly underestimated. .
Bangladesh's Female Secondary Stipend Program was successful in helping girls aged 11 to 14 to delay marriage and remain in school. .
Governments must also begin to offer "second chances" for young people who have fallen behind due to difficult circumstances or poor choices. .
Such programs must be well designed, targeted, and coordinated to give the right incentives to beneficiaries. .
For example, sub-Saharan Africa has thousands of young combatants -- 100,000 in Sudan alone -- who hope to reconstruct their lives in peacetime but clearly require skills training and jobs, as well as medical and psychological support. .
Focusing political will and the efforts of young people themselves to expand opportunities, enhance capabilities, and provide second chances can help countries make the most of today's demographic advantage. .
Countries can either harness this growth -- and in so doing, transform their development prospects -- or face the risk of an alienated generation embittered by the unfulfilled chance of a better future. .
Down with Euro-Paternalism .
Italy's presidency of the European Union bears an enormous responsibility, namely reinvigorating enlargement as the key aspect of the new EU. .
A good place to start would be to push for a different attitude on accession countries' adoption of the Euro. .
Indeed, EU institutions' current paternalistic stance towards the accession countries threatens to create a two-tier Europe that will complicate the task of integration. .
The accession countries have upheld their end of the bargain, achieving a degree of trade integration with EU countries that is even higher than many current members. .
Three of them--Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania--have currency boards or a fixed exchange rate with the Euro, as does Bulgaria, which is expected to enter the EU in 2007. .
The others have declared for several years their interest in adopting the Euro early on, in some cases unilaterally, even before entry into the EU--a position openly supported by the National Bank of Poland, and less forcefully by the National Bank of Hungary and the Czech National Bank. .
But, despite their progress in bringing their inflation and interest rates closer to EU levels, many candidate countries fear that with the full opening up to capital flows--a requirement of accession--they will be exposed to the risk of sudden stops in capital flows and currency crises. .
There is also a general reluctance to report unfavorable drug effects. .
Physicians may feel guilty and fear litigation, drug companies worry about the threat to corporate profits and regulatory agencies must face the question: "Why was the drug approved in the first place?" .
It is especially difficult to attribute an adverse reaction to a drug if the medical event is common in the user's age group or in the condition being treated. .
Because the risk of heart attacks is high in older people, many of whom have arthritic pain requiring treatment with painkillers, it took six years to link Cox-2 inhibitors to a two- to three-fold increase in the risk of heart attacks. .
A recent Harris Survey in the US concluded that 60% of adults are either not confident at all or not very confident that drug makers will publicly and in a timely manner disclose data on their products' adverse effects. .
Their skepticism is hardly groundless: internal documents obtained in recent lawsuits reveal that drug companies often fail to submit critical safety information to regulatory agencies, as required by law, and fail to communicate such information to physicians and patients. .
One problem is that the consequences for neglecting drug safety are non-existing or minimal. .
The time has come to get serious: .
· Citizens and government must make drug safety a priority and commit adequate resources to fixing the problems; .
· Penalties for drug companies' failure to report and communicate safety information must be increased dramatically if they are to serve as effective deterrents; .
· Regulatory agencies need enforcement authority so that stricter rules can be implemented; .
· The drug-safety problem must be seen as a systemic failure. .
It is unfair to blame clinicians for serious ADR's, particularly in the absence of complete safety information. .
Fixing the problem requires full cooperation from clinicians, but this requires ending their fear of litigation. .
This approach works well in the airline industry: pilots reporting near misses are not penalized; .
· Patients need to be better informed about the risks of prescription drugs and more involved in detection and reporting. .
Package inserts in fine print are useless; .
· Monitoring of ADR's must be more pro-active. .
This requires more funding, which should come from the main beneficiary of drug sales -- the pharmaceutical industry -- just as oversight of aviation safety is funded by the airlines. .
Above all, the success of any comprehensive effort to improve drug safety hinges upon establishing an independent office of drug safety to advocate, coordinate, and provide direction to the regulatory agenda. .
Such an office exists in the United Kingdom. .
Other governments should follow this model in order to fulfill their neglected role as guardian of public health. .
The Virtual Enemy .
Five years have passed since the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington of September, 2001, yet it seems that policymakers have learned little about how terrorist cells operate, and what their weaknesses are. .
The Bush administration still uses the phrase "war on terror" and behaves as though it really is a war, the ordinary kind where one government fights another. .
Yet after five years of military exertions, strategies based on targeting a united aggressor have only made the situation worse. .
It is time to understand the new, emerging model of conflict. .
In order to make the "war" paradigm fit, the Bush administration alludes to al-Qaeda as a centrally directed enemy. .
In fact, there is now no master planner or funder of terrorist activities. .
The Madrid, London, and Bali attacks, as well as several thwarted operations in the United States and Britain, were all characterized by their dispersed organization. .
Independently generated plots emerged and used ad hoc resources, often within the target country. .
Those small operations also lacked a common internal design. .
Terrorist motivations differ from cell to cell, even from person to person. .
Individuals can be involved for profit and power, or for political and religious reasons, while others participate for hate or thrills. .
Moreover, there are vast differences in terms of risks, rewards, and imperatives as one moves up the organizational chain, or jumps from cell to cell. .
Conventional military models are geared to decapitate something that, in this case, has no head. .
The characteristics of this new structure have already been studied in a very different context. .
Terrorism is a violent version of an "agile virtual enterprise." .
A virtual enterprise is any small group that self-assembles into an organization that is just large enough to accomplish the collective intention. .
Virtual enterprises are unusually innovative, and, in the business sector, they are possibly the only system that can build a one-off product well. .
A conspicuous example already exists in the movie production industry. .
In fact, they are probably the commercial model of the future. .
The benefits of virtual enterprises stem from their lightness over stability. .
At present, most of the price of any product supports the huge, inefficient organization that assembled it. .
Nearly all the creativity and problem solving occurs in small companies and is later "integrated" by mega-corporations, which have an expensive and vulnerable infrastructure, and keep most of the profit. .
This model is the current basis of the business world, just as centralization has also been the favored defense strategy. .
When you buy a car from General Motors, 80 cents from each dollar goes to GM, which mostly only manages itself. .
The small suppliers actually provide you with 80% of the value and innovation but only receive 20% of the reward. .
Ironically, extensive research into alternative models was funded through the US Department of Defense, which, as the world's largest buyer of complex machinery, wanted better, cheaper and more tailored goods. .
Unfortunately, the research program was cancelled before its findings could be applied in the business world, almost certainly because it threatened large companies. .
It is often forgotten that US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld emerged from a comfortable retirement to reorganize the American military into a smaller, more agile force, using some of these same insights. .
But the planning for the Iraq invasion, in which Rumsfeld advocated the use of fewer troops than advised, suggests a poor understanding of distributed systems. .
While the forces were deployed for a flexible entry and withdrawal, the Bush administration ended up using them for an old-fashioned occupation. .
Terrorists have been better at capitalizing on models of distributed operation. .
Scores of texts are appearing in the Muslim world on jihadi strategic studies. .
The best known in the West is The Management of Savagery , but only because it was translated and made public. .
These books (and the trends they indicate) are becoming less dogmatic and increasingly sophisticated in the adoption of modern management techniques. .
Their research surely includes the young science of virtual enterprise management: how to nurture and support self-organizing cells. .
Perhaps the first lesson for Western policymakers is that virtual enterprises run on a culture of trust. .
Michael Tilson Thomas in San Francisco, for example, has combined effective fundraising and artistic leadership to propel the San Francisco Symphony to the top rank of US orchestras. .
It also should be reassuring to Europeans who are concerned that greater reliance on private money necessarily means conservative programming that the San Francisco Symphony has one of the most adventuresome repertoires in the US. .
If the audience has progressive tastes, private money and innovative programming are entirely compatible. .
A corollary is that public money makes it possible for adventuresome programming even if audience tastes run to the conservative side. .
This is one reason performing artists in Europe like public money -- it liberates them from a diet of only Beethoven and Mozart. .
Moreover, the audience may come to appreciate an adventuresome repertoire the more it becomes exposed to it. .
Of course, with reduced public spending on the performing arts, not only will there be greater reliance on private money, but ticket prices will have to rise as well. .
Some argue that this is a bad thing, because they prefer queuing to the price system and fear that higher prices will compromise future audiences by excluding young people. .
But cheap prices for the performing arts do not solve the thorny problem of access for youth. .
First, youth may not take advantage of cheap tickets to the extent that they are not interested in going to hear live classical music at any price. .
Some kinds of trust can be based on an artificial notion of "not us" rather than on real values and direct experience. .
Second, even if they do want to go, they may not be able to get seats, which often are not available because subscriptions stay in the same hands year after year. .
What good are cheap prices, which serve mainly to subsidize the same subscription holders, if there are no seats? .
If a taste for classical music is to be subsidized, some more targeted subsidies should be preferred to cheap prices. .
The best way to bring youth to the performing arts is through education. .
Because American orchestras can't count on schools or government to provide the basic music education necessary to ensure a continuing audience for classical music, some orchestras are doing it themselves with private money. .
In San Francisco, for example, the Symphony runs a $23 million privately funded project -- called Keeping Score -- that includes a national public television series, radio shows, interactive music learning, and school music programs. .
This type of innovative program is relevant for European as well as American orchestras. .
The problem of youth and access to the performing arts exists on both sides of the Atlantic. .
So does poor music education in state schools. .
If orchestras don't look after their own futures, they may well not have one to look after. .
That is why the Bush administration's actions actually strengthen the virtual terrorist enterprise dynamic. .
Law and Order, Russian-Style .
Around the world, people worry that political freedom is disappearing in Vladimir Putin's Russia. .
Indeed, about the only people who are unconcerned about creeping authoritarianism in Russia are the Russians themselves. .
Russians seem to care less about political freedom than they do about social welfare - pensions, domestic violence, children's rights, or police brutality. .
In fact, most Russians are indifferent to the government's efforts to curtail press freedom and limit the right to protest. .
Such apathy makes my task as Russia's ombudsman, an office charged by the State Duma (parliament) with protecting political rights in Russia, difficult, if not impossible. .
The ombudsman acts as a bridge between the authorities and the people, seeking to resolve conflicts that arise between state bodies and citizens. .
My office is open not only to Russian citizens, but to foreigners and stateless people who feel their political rights have been compromised. .
The standards we apply are not only those contained in Russia's constitution, but also international legal principles and human rights norms, even if they sometimes contradict our constitution. .
For example, as ombudsman, I was opposed to curtailing the right of Russians to jury trials. .
Bush's "us and them" rhetoric clearly defines an "other" and positions it as a cohesive enemy. .
Those who wanted to limit the use of juries supposedly feared a risk to state security in some instances. .
My office worked closely with the state to assure that, in most cases, juries are used. .
Similarly, my office defended the liberal weekly newspaper Novoe Vremya (New Times), which was being pressured by Moscow's city government on the pretext of a commercial dispute about a lease. .
That fight is not over, but after my intervention, Moscow's authorities must take into account the public's negative attitude to their effort to quash this publication. .
Of course, Russia provides far more headline-grabbling examples of political and human rights problems, such as the low-grade war in Chechnya or the Yukos affair. .
My office pays maximum attention to Chechnya, although this is not easy to do from Moscow. .
Indeed, I could spend all my time in Chechnya, but Russia has 89 regions with countless human rights issues to address. .
This is why I suggested to Putin that Chechnya have its own regional rights ombudsman who would spend all his time there. .
The new Chechen authorities seem to welcome this prospect. .
As to the Yukos affair, my office cannot intervene in any legal process until it is completed. .
His "war" approach is making it easier for Islamist terrorists to view the West as an equally united and malevolent force. .
Former Yukos CEO Mikhail Khodorkovsky's lawyers have sent a complaint to the European Court for Human Rights in Strasbourg. .
If Khodorkovsky disagrees with the final decision of the Russian courts, he will undoubtedly appeal to that court. .
Only then will I be able to express an opinion. .
Many observers nonetheless insist that those under criminal investigation should be released on bail instead of being kept in prison. .
Others say that this is not an option in Khodorkovsky's case - being very rich, he could easily jump bail and flee abroad. .
In fact, this is precisely what happened with other figures accused in the Yukos case. .
All of these serious human rights questions expose the fact that Russia's legal institutions remains half-formed. .
For example, the Duma has taken far too long to enact a law on lobbying, which in most developed democracies clearly defines what constitutes acceptable and unacceptable behavior. .
Khodorkovsky might not be in as much trouble if such precise laws existed. .
Unformed laws are directly related to unformed ideas. .
In the future, the virtual enterprise model will shape how business is conducted, wars will be fought and probably how government services will be administered. .
Human rights in Russia are often violated simply because people are not aware that they have some particular right. .
It promises to decouple the management of finance from that of production, implying faster innovation and economic growth. .
However, if Western governments do not develop a deep understanding of how these structures operate, they stand no chance of combating the agile terrorist enterprise. .
Expansion is Solidarity .
Nowadays it is often alleged that the European Union's sense of solidarity was put in jeopardy, if not shattered outright, by its enlargement to take in the countries of central and eastern Europe. .
As Bulgaria and Romania come closer to membership, and with accession talks with Turkey and Croatia set to begin, it has become increasingly important to challenge that view. .
The values and interests of the EU's newest member states coincide in most ways with those of the 15 earlier members. .
It is, of course, true that enlargement has fundamentally changed the Union and given rise to new problems and policy concerns. .
But the new member states in central and eastern Europe are deeply embedded in the economic, social, and cultural development of our Continent. .
The ties that bind us together were frayed by forty years of Soviet domination, but this did not fundamentally change these states' European character. .
My country, Poland, has always had deep cultural ties to other European countries, especially France. .
We participated in all the major developments in European music, literature, and film (think of Andrzej Wajda's films from the Solidarity era, such as "Danton," which were French co-productions). .
Even in sport, East Europeans have long been integrated with the rest of Europe. .
Indeed, before World War I the German national football team consisted entirely of players with Polish names. .
But, above all, there is a deep sense among Poles, Hungarians, Czechs, and others, that they are Europeans. .
This is the very meaning of the word "solidarity," as defined in the Oxford English Dictionary: "unity resulting from feelings and sympathies." .
Solidarity, in the sense of unity resulting from common interests, also clearly exists within both the original EU-15 and the enlarged Union. .
The exceptions prove the rule. .
The EU's disunity over the war in Iraq should not overshadow its member states' agreement on almost all other great questions of international affairs. .
In economic matters, disagreements on, say, a single EU regulation should not be allowed to mask the fact that no member state, new or old, has ever contested the internal market. .
Finally, the enlargement process itself is also manifestly a symbol of European social, civic, and cultural unity. .
The fact that it provoked debate and dispute does not detract from the conviction shared by old and new member states that they had an obligation to rebuild the Continent after 40 years of division. .
But there are concerns that, if not fundamentally divisive, are worrying. .
Should we fear the fact that Europe is no longer a purely Jewish/Christian and white continent? .
Will EU citizens whose origins are in other continents and whose religion is Hindu or Islam, Sikh or Buddhist, be able to identify with "European" values and culture? .
Will they be able to feel European, like the Poles or the Czechs have always felt? .
These questions apply most pointedly -- indeed, they cannot be avoided -- in the case of Turkey's possible accession to the EU. .
Is European integration animated by respect for another's values? .
Is it about sharing them or about contributing to them? .
These are obviously knotty questions. .
They are particularly difficult if we see culture as the cement of Europe's future. .
All European countries probably believed at the outset that non-European newcomers could be assimilated in the same way that Polish immigrants were assimilated into Germany's Ruhr region in the nineteenth century. .
That this has not happened, at least on a large scale, is not to say that it cannot happen at all. .
Look at the growing number of prominent citizens of Turkish origin in Germany. .
Consider the many second generation Indian and Pakistani Britons who are now seen in business suits carrying laptop computers and flying around the world. .
But Europeans must admit that these individuals represent a small minority. .
Many immigrant groups in Europe find themselves flung back on their own communities by the impossibility of social and economic integration. .
The constant threat of terrorism has made this isolation even more dramatic for the Europe's Islamic populations. .
The EU cannot simply proclaim "solidarity" as a core value and then do nothing to foster it among those who feel marginalized. .
They, too, must be allowed to feel those ties of "unity resulting from feelings and sympathy." .
European solidarity cannot and will not survive their neglect. .
After Kyoto .
The Kyoto Protocol treaty has now entered into force for the 126 nations who have joined it so far. .
Now is the time to start thinking about how to engage all nations, including large emitters, in conversations about what to do after the treaty's expiration in 2012. .
This is exactly what the European Commission did recently by providing its first strategy for a post-Kyoto era, which will be discussed by the European Council next March. .
While the Kyoto Protocol represents only a modest reduction of carbon emissions in industrialized countries -- 5.2% between 2008-2012 relative to 1990 levels, with varying targets for individual countries -- real progress can be made in sustaining development efforts and preserving our planet. .
But first, all countries must integrate climate concerns into policy planning, and improve their governance in key sectors such as energy, infrastructure, and transport. .
In other words, we must act in accordance with the recognition that climate change and its effects on people in both rich and poor countries remains a threat to global security. .
At the end of the day, the long-term approach is likely to include a rules-based system, an incentives system, and investments in technology change. .
Increasingly, adaptation at the national level will be recognized as a major issue that will require appropriate funding. .
Dealing with the impacts of climate change and with emission reductions should not be mutually exclusive, but complementary. .
Looking ahead to the post-Kyoto world offers us the chance to start a new dialogue and to look at new options on climate change. .
Nations could set the more ambitious goal of limiting the long-term change in the earth's temperature, and then assign emissions rights among countries in such a way that will eventually limit temperature increases to an acceptable level. .
This would require increasing investments in energy research and development for new and improved technologies -- a process that needs to be supported by stronger public-private partnerships. .
Up to now, with only 15% of the world's population, rich countries have been responsible for more than 75% of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, and thus most of the environmental damage. .
However, it is the developing countries -- and thus the world's poor -- who are most vulnerable. .
It is unrealistic to ask poor countries, where more than 1.6 billion people do not have access to clean energy and technologies, to bear the costs associated with the much needed technological change. .
Working with partners, the World Bank is supporting financial strategies to assist developing countries in meeting the costs caused by climate change. .
To date, over $1 billion dollars in Global Environment Facility (GEF) grants, together with about $8 billion in co-financing, have been committed to programs related to climate change. .
While the regulatory mechanisms of both Kyoto and the European Trading Scheme have contributed to the establishment of an emerging market for carbon trading, interested parties are now concerned about the immediate future. .
Without a regulatory framework beyond 2012, the window of opportunity for initiating project-based transactions will close by 2006/2007. .
Given the long lead time between project preparation and the first benefits of emissions reductions, project developers have only a few years to act before carbon payments cease to make a meaningful contribution to project finance in the current context. .
Developing infrastructure projects is a long process that requires 3-7 years from identification, through licensing, financing, and construction, and finally to the first certification of carbon emission reductions. .
Therefore, projects need to be operational at the latest by 2007. .
The World Bank has been instrumental in advancing carbon finance as a viable development tool, and in facilitating private-sector participation in the market. .
The Bank is focused on representing the interests of its borrowing countries, helping them to develop assets for carbon trading according to their own priorities. .
But, without a commitment by governments to limit greenhouse gas emissions beyond 2012, the carbon market will remain uncertain, and the private sector -- vital to the market's success -- is unlikely to expand its participation in a meaningful and sustained way. .
According to a recent World Bank-supported survey of companies interested in carbon finance, only one in five respondents declared that they were interested in buying post-2012 emissions reductions. .
Now is the chance to look forward and enlist the global community -- with no exclusions, although with differentiated responsibilities -- in the pursuit of a more secure world, one that avoids the dire risks of environmental degradation and social conflict implied by inaction. .
State of the Art, or Art of the State? .
September is traditionally the time when opera companies and orchestras return to their home cities from Aix, Salzburg, Tanglewood, and countless other summer festivals. .
This rentrée is also marked (on both sides of the Atlantic) by the return of worries about how classical music is financed. .
American symphonic life is Euro-centric in almost every respect except for its funding. .
Whereas Americans depend upon tax-deductible private donations and box office receipts to finance live classical music, Europeans prefer direct government support for the arts. .
Ironically, while arts advocates in the United States have long argued for adoption of the "European model" -- which has produced a rich and varied artistic life for Europeans -- Europe is being forced to change its system of support to one that depends more on private money and the box office. .
Unfortunately, Europe's system of direct government financial support is falling victim to Europe's slow economic growth and budget deficits. .
Particularly for those countries that have adopted the euro, government spending on the arts will be constrained for some time by the requirement that fiscal deficits be kept to 3% of GDP. .
The resulting pressure on Europe's performing arts institutions is causing concern at various different levels. .
Traditionally, Europe's social democracies have preferred allocating scarce goods and services like concerts and operas by queues (financed by huge subsidies to keep prices low) rather than by willingness to pay. .
Now, this will change. .
Performing arts advocates in Europe point to the US where, among other things, music directors of even major orchestras are now expected to fully participate in fundraising activities and be active in the local community on the orchestras behalf. .
The same thing, they fear, will happen in Europe. .
Some conductors, not wanting to carry a tin cup as they wave their batons, have rejected important posts in the US for this reason, feeling that it would interfere with their art. .
Daniel Barenboim is rumored to have left the Chicago Symphony Orchestra in part because he objected to the fundraising demands that were being made of him. .
But US experience shows that getting artistic leaders like orchestra music directors to participate in fundraising need not be bad for the artistic side of the job. .
By announcing its determination to go ahead with a distant NMD, the US has created political turbulence which it must address now if major damage is to be avoided. .
The New Baby Boomers .
Alienated and unemployed youth are a concern everywhere. .
They pose a particular challenge in the developing world, where a demographic bulge equal to the great "baby boom" that occurred in the West at the end of World War II is growing. .
But the post-war era in the world's most developed countries was one of unprecedented prosperity for the baby boom generation, which is now nearing retirement. .
Will the future be as promising for the developing world's billion-plus young people between the ages of 12 and 24? .
Throughout the developing world, governments urgently need to devise the right mix of investments and policies to encourage their young people to get an education, find work, stay healthy, form families, and exercise citizenship. .
The payoff is huge if they get it right: accelerated development as economies reap the benefits of a burgeoning working-age population and lower dependency ratios. .
In East Asia, this "demographic dividend" is believed to have generated more than a quarter of the region's economic growth. .
Developing countries have already invested heavily in children. .
The research noted the conditions and triggers needed to facilitate the self-assembly of small opportunistic groups and enable them to act like large companies. .
The most important strategic goal of my office is that people learn how to defend their rights better, and to make the authorities take the complaints of ordinary Russians into consideration. .
Sadly, most bureaucrats still look upon human rights values with disdain. .
But the real problem for my office is neither ignorance nor legal infirmity, it is that in an under-developed legal system such as Russia's, my authority is mostly personal, and requires help from the mass media. .
Because concepts of human rights remain rudimentary, the best that can be hoped for is that awareness will slowly begin to take hold. .
My tactical goal is thus to raise the public profile of the ombudsman's office, in order to win more respect and recognition by both citizens and the state. .
This will be all but impossible without cooperation with non-governmental human rights organizations in Russia. .
Indeed, I view one of my tasks as being to facilitate contacts between these groups and the authorities. .
The government's response to these efforts will be an important indicator of whether and to what extent Putin's administration intends to include human and political rights within its so-called "dictatorship of law." .
The Revolutionary Conservative Pope .
Their young people are therefore better-educated and healthier than previous generations. .
Twenty-five years ago, Poland's people were stunned by the choice of their compatriot, Cardinal Karol Wojtyla of Cracow, as Pope. .
Some were frightened, others wept with joy. .
Here, said a prominent writer, was "Poland's second baptism." .
But even in our euphoria, we did not expect how much the new Pope would change not only Poland, but the world. .
His first return visit to his native country soon afterwards showed to all the world the new Pope's power. .
Communist police disappeared from the main streets of Warsaw, yet the streets became models of order. .
After decades of disempowerment, Poles suddenly regained their capacity for self-determination. .
In saying aloud that "there can be no just Europe without an independent Poland on its map," the Pope effectively swept away the unjust postwar settlement that had subjugated Poland to Soviet power. .
Then, in Auschwitz, the Pope said: "I speak in the name of everyone whose rights go unrecognized and violated anywhere in the world, I speak because I am bound, we are all bound, by truth." .
On that spot, that Golgotha of modern times, he called the Poles, who remembered dear ones gassed to death in Auschwitz's crematoria as well as those frozen into glass in Siberia's concentration camps, to a brotherhood devoted to struggle against even justified hatred and revenge. .
More than 80% of children now attend primary school, up from 50% in 1970, and infant mortality has fallen from more than 10% to 6.5% over the same period. .
Some see in the Pope the person responsible for a religious revival; others see a man of peace. .
Some see a defender of the poor, others a critic of liberation theology. .
For the people of Poland, John Paul II, by making human rights the central subject of his teaching, will forever be the man who gave us courage and hope, who restored our historical identity. .
Indeed, the central feature of the first decade of the Pope's reign was his struggle against dictatorship--Communist dictatorship in particular. .
The strategy formulated by the Pope for the Catholic Church, and his ability to mobilize millions of believers in its cause, meant that no one could ever again repeat Stalin's question: "How many divisions does the Pope have?" .
John Paul II demonstrated that moral force was a weapon potent enough to undo Yalta's division of the world. .
Perhaps in part because of their strong anticommunist stance, the Polish Church and John Paul II are often branded as "conservative." .
The accusation is meant to suggest that the Church cannot live comfortably with a pluralist democracy. .
To be sure, in the struggle against Communism, the Polish Church was, indeed, conservative--and thank God for that! .
It was conservative in its absolute fidelity to evangelical values, to the truth of faith, to its historical identity. .
But now governments must go beyond investments in children and begin supporting the new generation of young people. .
For the system of official atheism and legalized mendacity, the Church was a living rebuke. .
With Communism gone, however, the problem confronted by John Paul II and his Church today is this: in what language can evangelical values be articulated in a world where evil is not incarnated in a political system but is diffused in individual souls? .
What is the Pope's message for the postcommunist world he helped create? .
John Paul II undoubtedly keeps a distance from liberal economic ideas and the liberal state, which he often charges with permissiveness and moral relativism. .
A critique of individualism in the name of collective values occurs frequently in the Pope's pronouncements. .
He sees the failings of liberalism as particularly pernicious in postcommunist countries. .
The market economy, despite its practical achievements, seems to him oftentimes to lack a heart and a human face. .
He sees the market as favoring entrepreneurship over human solidarity. .
So John Paul II is no enthusiast of modern Western civilization, with its divorce from the world of values, and he contrasts with it the moral sensitivity of societies with fresh memories of decades of dictatorship. .
Like Alexander Solzhenitsyn, the Pope tends to believe that it was above all in resistance to totalitarianism that man could become truly free and preserve the fundamental values of civilization. .
Indeed, even in countries with high primary-school completion rates, many young people do not attend secondary school. .
I confess that I view the heritage of Communism with more skepticism. .
Totalitarian pressure did, indeed, form exceptional people such as John Paul II and Alexander Solzhenitsyn, people for whom religious faith bought freedom from mendacity and solitude. .
But it did the same for Andrei Sakharov and Vaclav Havel, who defended their supreme values with reference to, and in the language of, lay humanism. .
For most people, however, life under totalitarian dictatorship was not ennobling; it was, rather, a daily immersion in lies, spiritual depravity, and material corruption. .
This is why postcommunist societies do not demonstrate any nobility or disinterestedness that seriously contrasts with the West. .
Communism's defeat left a huge black hole in communities' souls, which is now being filled with nationalism, bigotry, and Western consumerism. .
But John Paul II's basic intuition is correct: the postcommunist world--East and West--is in spiritual crisis, and the Pope wants to shake it into realizing the importance of higher values. .
Indeed, by his words and example, the Pope disrupts the world: it wants to live in wealth and comfort; he reminds us that we must also live in dignity. .
In the end, John Paul II does not fit neatly into any category and often represents a meeting of opposites: rejection of compromise with ecumenism, toughness with warmth, intellectual openness with insistence on theological orthodoxy. .
He is a conservative who loves freedom and a "peacemonger" who condemns injustice, but who reminds us that mercy is more important than justice. .
Young people account for half of all new HIV infections. .
In this, he personifies the paradox that is Christianity: unbreakable and lasting principles joined by understanding and tolerance. .
And, in the Middle East and North Africa region, about a quarter of all young people are unemployed. .
These problems raise thorny questions: What prevents more young people from attending secondary school? .
Is it because they are sometimes close to being illiterate even after primary school, or because it is unaffordable? .
Why don't more young people learn how to lower the risk of getting HIV/AIDS? .
Why do businesses in these countries complain of a lack of skilled workers when so many university students are jobless? .
To build successful youth-friendly policies, governments need to focus on three policy areas: expanding opportunities, enhancing capabilities, and providing second chances for young people. .
Governments must broaden opportunities for young people by improving access to, and the quality of, health and educational services. .
We know that the full benefit of primary school is realized only when children go on to secondary school. .
Yet many young people are ill prepared for secondary school, and places are scarce. .
Today's employers want highly skilled workers. .
More than 20% of all firms, in countries as diverse as Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Estonia, and Zambia, rate inadequate skills and education of workers as a major or a severe obstacle. .
If young people are not to become stuck in dead-end jobs, or end up without jobs at all, they need better education and skills that match those needed by employers. .
Several countries now facilitate access to secondary schooling, in particular through "conditional cash transfer programs," which offer a stipend to poor families whose children regularly attend school. .
These programs have successfully increased secondary school enrollment in countries like Mexico, Ecuador, Bangladesh, and Cambodia. .
For these programs to work, however, children must be ready to enter secondary education. .
Yet, in Morocco, for example, more than 80% of school children complete primary school, but fewer than 20% have mastered the material. .
Second, policies should support young people as they strive to make good decisions. .
Governments cannot substitute for parents or for communities, but they can encourage young people and their families to invest in themselves. .
Armed with the right information and incentives, young people can make better decisions about their health and education. .
In Cameroon, Horizon Jeunes, a reproductive health program that targets urban youth, increased young people's knowledge of reproductive health and successfully changed their behavior, with condom use among females increasing from 58% to 76% in the treatment group. .
Similarly, the rate at which eighth graders from the Dominican Republic entered upper secondary levels increased when they were simply told how much more those who finished high school earned -- an amount they had vastly underestimated. .
Bangladesh's Female Secondary Stipend Program was successful in helping girls aged 11 to 14 to delay marriage and remain in school. .
Governments must also begin to offer "second chances" for young people who have fallen behind due to difficult circumstances or poor choices. .
Such programs must be well designed, targeted, and coordinated to give the right incentives to beneficiaries. .
For example, sub-Saharan Africa has thousands of young combatants -- 100,000 in Sudan alone -- who hope to reconstruct their lives in peacetime but clearly require skills training and jobs, as well as medical and psychological support. .
Focusing political will and the efforts of young people themselves to expand opportunities, enhance capabilities, and provide second chances can help countries make the most of today's demographic advantage. .
Countries can either harness this growth -- and in so doing, transform their development prospects -- or face the risk of an alienated generation embittered by the unfulfilled chance of a better future. .
Down with Euro-Paternalism .
Italy's presidency of the European Union bears an enormous responsibility, namely reinvigorating enlargement as the key aspect of the new EU. .
A good place to start would be to push for a different attitude on accession countries' adoption of the Euro. .
Indeed, EU institutions' current paternalistic stance towards the accession countries threatens to create a two-tier Europe that will complicate the task of integration. .
The accession countries have upheld their end of the bargain, achieving a degree of trade integration with EU countries that is even higher than many current members. .
Three of them--Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania--have currency boards or a fixed exchange rate with the Euro, as does Bulgaria, which is expected to enter the EU in 2007. .
The others have declared for several years their interest in adopting the Euro early on, in some cases unilaterally, even before entry into the EU--a position openly supported by the National Bank of Poland, and less forcefully by the National Bank of Hungary and the Czech National Bank. .
But, despite their progress in bringing their inflation and interest rates closer to EU levels, many candidate countries fear that with the full opening up to capital flows--a requirement of accession--they will be exposed to the risk of sudden stops in capital flows and currency crises. .
There is also a general reluctance to report unfavorable drug effects. .
Physicians may feel guilty and fear litigation, drug companies worry about the threat to corporate profits and regulatory agencies must face the question: "Why was the drug approved in the first place?" .
It is especially difficult to attribute an adverse reaction to a drug if the medical event is common in the user's age group or in the condition being treated. .
Because the risk of heart attacks is high in older people, many of whom have arthritic pain requiring treatment with painkillers, it took six years to link Cox-2 inhibitors to a two- to three-fold increase in the risk of heart attacks. .
A recent Harris Survey in the US concluded that 60% of adults are either not confident at all or not very confident that drug makers will publicly and in a timely manner disclose data on their products' adverse effects. .
Their skepticism is hardly groundless: internal documents obtained in recent lawsuits reveal that drug companies often fail to submit critical safety information to regulatory agencies, as required by law, and fail to communicate such information to physicians and patients. .
One problem is that the consequences for neglecting drug safety are non-existing or minimal. .
The time has come to get serious: .
· Citizens and government must make drug safety a priority and commit adequate resources to fixing the problems; .
· Penalties for drug companies' failure to report and communicate safety information must be increased dramatically if they are to serve as effective deterrents; .
· Regulatory agencies need enforcement authority so that stricter rules can be implemented; .
· The drug-safety problem must be seen as a systemic failure. .
It is unfair to blame clinicians for serious ADR's, particularly in the absence of complete safety information. .
Fixing the problem requires full cooperation from clinicians, but this requires ending their fear of litigation. .
This approach works well in the airline industry: pilots reporting near misses are not penalized; .
· Patients need to be better informed about the risks of prescription drugs and more involved in detection and reporting. .
Package inserts in fine print are useless; .
· Monitoring of ADR's must be more pro-active. .
This requires more funding, which should come from the main beneficiary of drug sales -- the pharmaceutical industry -- just as oversight of aviation safety is funded by the airlines. .
Above all, the success of any comprehensive effort to improve drug safety hinges upon establishing an independent office of drug safety to advocate, coordinate, and provide direction to the regulatory agenda. .
Such an office exists in the United Kingdom. .
Other governments should follow this model in order to fulfill their neglected role as guardian of public health. .
The Virtual Enemy .
Five years have passed since the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington of September, 2001, yet it seems that policymakers have learned little about how terrorist cells operate, and what their weaknesses are. .
The Bush administration still uses the phrase "war on terror" and behaves as though it really is a war, the ordinary kind where one government fights another. .
Yet after five years of military exertions, strategies based on targeting a united aggressor have only made the situation worse. .
It is time to understand the new, emerging model of conflict. .
In order to make the "war" paradigm fit, the Bush administration alludes to al-Qaeda as a centrally directed enemy. .
In fact, there is now no master planner or funder of terrorist activities. .
The Madrid, London, and Bali attacks, as well as several thwarted operations in the United States and Britain, were all characterized by their dispersed organization. .
Independently generated plots emerged and used ad hoc resources, often within the target country. .
Those small operations also lacked a common internal design. .
Terrorist motivations differ from cell to cell, even from person to person. .
Individuals can be involved for profit and power, or for political and religious reasons, while others participate for hate or thrills. .
Moreover, there are vast differences in terms of risks, rewards, and imperatives as one moves up the organizational chain, or jumps from cell to cell. .
Conventional military models are geared to decapitate something that, in this case, has no head. .
The characteristics of this new structure have already been studied in a very different context. .
Terrorism is a violent version of an "agile virtual enterprise." .
A virtual enterprise is any small group that self-assembles into an organization that is just large enough to accomplish the collective intention. .
Virtual enterprises are unusually innovative, and, in the business sector, they are possibly the only system that can build a one-off product well. .
A conspicuous example already exists in the movie production industry. .
In fact, they are probably the commercial model of the future. .
The benefits of virtual enterprises stem from their lightness over stability. .
At present, most of the price of any product supports the huge, inefficient organization that assembled it. .
Nearly all the creativity and problem solving occurs in small companies and is later "integrated" by mega-corporations, which have an expensive and vulnerable infrastructure, and keep most of the profit. .
This model is the current basis of the business world, just as centralization has also been the favored defense strategy. .
When you buy a car from General Motors, 80 cents from each dollar goes to GM, which mostly only manages itself. .
The small suppliers actually provide you with 80% of the value and innovation but only receive 20% of the reward. .
Ironically, extensive research into alternative models was funded through the US Department of Defense, which, as the world's largest buyer of complex machinery, wanted better, cheaper and more tailored goods. .
Unfortunately, the research program was cancelled before its findings could be applied in the business world, almost certainly because it threatened large companies. .
It is often forgotten that US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld emerged from a comfortable retirement to reorganize the American military into a smaller, more agile force, using some of these same insights. .
But the planning for the Iraq invasion, in which Rumsfeld advocated the use of fewer troops than advised, suggests a poor understanding of distributed systems. .
While the forces were deployed for a flexible entry and withdrawal, the Bush administration ended up using them for an old-fashioned occupation. .
Terrorists have been better at capitalizing on models of distributed operation. .
Scores of texts are appearing in the Muslim world on jihadi strategic studies. .
The best known in the West is The Management of Savagery , but only because it was translated and made public. .
These books (and the trends they indicate) are becoming less dogmatic and increasingly sophisticated in the adoption of modern management techniques. .
Their research surely includes the young science of virtual enterprise management: how to nurture and support self-organizing cells. .
Perhaps the first lesson for Western policymakers is that virtual enterprises run on a culture of trust. .
Michael Tilson Thomas in San Francisco, for example, has combined effective fundraising and artistic leadership to propel the San Francisco Symphony to the top rank of US orchestras. .
It also should be reassuring to Europeans who are concerned that greater reliance on private money necessarily means conservative programming that the San Francisco Symphony has one of the most adventuresome repertoires in the US. .
If the audience has progressive tastes, private money and innovative programming are entirely compatible. .
A corollary is that public money makes it possible for adventuresome programming even if audience tastes run to the conservative side. .
This is one reason performing artists in Europe like public money -- it liberates them from a diet of only Beethoven and Mozart. .
Moreover, the audience may come to appreciate an adventuresome repertoire the more it becomes exposed to it. .
Of course, with reduced public spending on the performing arts, not only will there be greater reliance on private money, but ticket prices will have to rise as well. .
Some argue that this is a bad thing, because they prefer queuing to the price system and fear that higher prices will compromise future audiences by excluding young people. .
But cheap prices for the performing arts do not solve the thorny problem of access for youth. .
First, youth may not take advantage of cheap tickets to the extent that they are not interested in going to hear live classical music at any price. .
Some kinds of trust can be based on an artificial notion of "not us" rather than on real values and direct experience. .
Second, even if they do want to go, they may not be able to get seats, which often are not available because subscriptions stay in the same hands year after year. .
What good are cheap prices, which serve mainly to subsidize the same subscription holders, if there are no seats? .
If a taste for classical music is to be subsidized, some more targeted subsidies should be preferred to cheap prices. .
The best way to bring youth to the performing arts is through education. .
Because American orchestras can't count on schools or government to provide the basic music education necessary to ensure a continuing audience for classical music, some orchestras are doing it themselves with private money. .
In San Francisco, for example, the Symphony runs a $23 million privately funded project -- called Keeping Score -- that includes a national public television series, radio shows, interactive music learning, and school music programs. .
This type of innovative program is relevant for European as well as American orchestras. .
The problem of youth and access to the performing arts exists on both sides of the Atlantic. .
So does poor music education in state schools. .
If orchestras don't look after their own futures, they may well not have one to look after. .
That is why the Bush administration's actions actually strengthen the virtual terrorist enterprise dynamic. .
Law and Order, Russian-Style .
Around the world, people worry that political freedom is disappearing in Vladimir Putin's Russia. .
Indeed, about the only people who are unconcerned about creeping authoritarianism in Russia are the Russians themselves. .
Russians seem to care less about political freedom than they do about social welfare - pensions, domestic violence, children's rights, or police brutality. .
In fact, most Russians are indifferent to the government's efforts to curtail press freedom and limit the right to protest. .
Such apathy makes my task as Russia's ombudsman, an office charged by the State Duma (parliament) with protecting political rights in Russia, difficult, if not impossible. .
The ombudsman acts as a bridge between the authorities and the people, seeking to resolve conflicts that arise between state bodies and citizens. .
My office is open not only to Russian citizens, but to foreigners and stateless people who feel their political rights have been compromised. .
The standards we apply are not only those contained in Russia's constitution, but also international legal principles and human rights norms, even if they sometimes contradict our constitution. .
For example, as ombudsman, I was opposed to curtailing the right of Russians to jury trials. .
Bush's "us and them" rhetoric clearly defines an "other" and positions it as a cohesive enemy. .
Those who wanted to limit the use of juries supposedly feared a risk to state security in some instances. .
My office worked closely with the state to assure that, in most cases, juries are used. .
Similarly, my office defended the liberal weekly newspaper Novoe Vremya (New Times), which was being pressured by Moscow's city government on the pretext of a commercial dispute about a lease. .
That fight is not over, but after my intervention, Moscow's authorities must take into account the public's negative attitude to their effort to quash this publication. .
Of course, Russia provides far more headline-grabbling examples of political and human rights problems, such as the low-grade war in Chechnya or the Yukos affair. .
My office pays maximum attention to Chechnya, although this is not easy to do from Moscow. .
Indeed, I could spend all my time in Chechnya, but Russia has 89 regions with countless human rights issues to address. .
This is why I suggested to Putin that Chechnya have its own regional rights ombudsman who would spend all his time there. .
The new Chechen authorities seem to welcome this prospect. .
As to the Yukos affair, my office cannot intervene in any legal process until it is completed. .
His "war" approach is making it easier for Islamist terrorists to view the West as an equally united and malevolent force. .
Former Yukos CEO Mikhail Khodorkovsky's lawyers have sent a complaint to the European Court for Human Rights in Strasbourg. .
If Khodorkovsky disagrees with the final decision of the Russian courts, he will undoubtedly appeal to that court. .
Only then will I be able to express an opinion. .
Many observers nonetheless insist that those under criminal investigation should be released on bail instead of being kept in prison. .
Others say that this is not an option in Khodorkovsky's case - being very rich, he could easily jump bail and flee abroad. .
In fact, this is precisely what happened with other figures accused in the Yukos case. .
All of these serious human rights questions expose the fact that Russia's legal institutions remains half-formed. .
For example, the Duma has taken far too long to enact a law on lobbying, which in most developed democracies clearly defines what constitutes acceptable and unacceptable behavior. .
Khodorkovsky might not be in as much trouble if such precise laws existed. .
Unformed laws are directly related to unformed ideas. .
In the future, the virtual enterprise model will shape how business is conducted, wars will be fought and probably how government services will be administered. .
Human rights in Russia are often violated simply because people are not aware that they have some particular right. .
It promises to decouple the management of finance from that of production, implying faster innovation and economic growth. .
However, if Western governments do not develop a deep understanding of how these structures operate, they stand no chance of combating the agile terrorist enterprise. .
Expansion is Solidarity .
Nowadays it is often alleged that the European Union's sense of solidarity was put in jeopardy, if not shattered outright, by its enlargement to take in the countries of central and eastern Europe. .
As Bulgaria and Romania come closer to membership, and with accession talks with Turkey and Croatia set to begin, it has become increasingly important to challenge that view. .
The values and interests of the EU's newest member states coincide in most ways with those of the 15 earlier members. .
It is, of course, true that enlargement has fundamentally changed the Union and given rise to new problems and policy concerns. .
But the new member states in central and eastern Europe are deeply embedded in the economic, social, and cultural development of our Continent. .
The ties that bind us together were frayed by forty years of Soviet domination, but this did not fundamentally change these states' European character. .
My country, Poland, has always had deep cultural ties to other European countries, especially France. .
We participated in all the major developments in European music, literature, and film (think of Andrzej Wajda's films from the Solidarity era, such as "Danton," which were French co-productions). .
Even in sport, East Europeans have long been integrated with the rest of Europe. .
Indeed, before World War I the German national football team consisted entirely of players with Polish names. .
But, above all, there is a deep sense among Poles, Hungarians, Czechs, and others, that they are Europeans. .
This is the very meaning of the word "solidarity," as defined in the Oxford English Dictionary: "unity resulting from feelings and sympathies." .
Solidarity, in the sense of unity resulting from common interests, also clearly exists within both the original EU-15 and the enlarged Union. .
The exceptions prove the rule. .
The EU's disunity over the war in Iraq should not overshadow its member states' agreement on almost all other great questions of international affairs. .
In economic matters, disagreements on, say, a single EU regulation should not be allowed to mask the fact that no member state, new or old, has ever contested the internal market. .
Finally, the enlargement process itself is also manifestly a symbol of European social, civic, and cultural unity. .
The fact that it provoked debate and dispute does not detract from the conviction shared by old and new member states that they had an obligation to rebuild the Continent after 40 years of division. .
But there are concerns that, if not fundamentally divisive, are worrying. .
Should we fear the fact that Europe is no longer a purely Jewish/Christian and white continent? .
Will EU citizens whose origins are in other continents and whose religion is Hindu or Islam, Sikh or Buddhist, be able to identify with "European" values and culture? .
Will they be able to feel European, like the Poles or the Czechs have always felt? .
These questions apply most pointedly -- indeed, they cannot be avoided -- in the case of Turkey's possible accession to the EU. .
Is European integration animated by respect for another's values? .
Is it about sharing them or about contributing to them? .
These are obviously knotty questions. .
They are particularly difficult if we see culture as the cement of Europe's future. .
All European countries probably believed at the outset that non-European newcomers could be assimilated in the same way that Polish immigrants were assimilated into Germany's Ruhr region in the nineteenth century. .
That this has not happened, at least on a large scale, is not to say that it cannot happen at all. .
Look at the growing number of prominent citizens of Turkish origin in Germany. .
Consider the many second generation Indian and Pakistani Britons who are now seen in business suits carrying laptop computers and flying around the world. .
But Europeans must admit that these individuals represent a small minority. .
Many immigrant groups in Europe find themselves flung back on their own communities by the impossibility of social and economic integration. .
The constant threat of terrorism has made this isolation even more dramatic for the Europe's Islamic populations. .
The EU cannot simply proclaim "solidarity" as a core value and then do nothing to foster it among those who feel marginalized. .
They, too, must be allowed to feel those ties of "unity resulting from feelings and sympathy." .
European solidarity cannot and will not survive their neglect. .
After Kyoto .
The Kyoto Protocol treaty has now entered into force for the 126 nations who have joined it so far. .
Now is the time to start thinking about how to engage all nations, including large emitters, in conversations about what to do after the treaty's expiration in 2012. .
This is exactly what the European Commission did recently by providing its first strategy for a post-Kyoto era, which will be discussed by the European Council next March. .
While the Kyoto Protocol represents only a modest reduction of carbon emissions in industrialized countries -- 5.2% between 2008-2012 relative to 1990 levels, with varying targets for individual countries -- real progress can be made in sustaining development efforts and preserving our planet. .
But first, all countries must integrate climate concerns into policy planning, and improve their governance in key sectors such as energy, infrastructure, and transport. .
In other words, we must act in accordance with the recognition that climate change and its effects on people in both rich and poor countries remains a threat to global security. .
At the end of the day, the long-term approach is likely to include a rules-based system, an incentives system, and investments in technology change. .
Increasingly, adaptation at the national level will be recognized as a major issue that will require appropriate funding. .
Dealing with the impacts of climate change and with emission reductions should not be mutually exclusive, but complementary. .
Looking ahead to the post-Kyoto world offers us the chance to start a new dialogue and to look at new options on climate change. .
Nations could set the more ambitious goal of limiting the long-term change in the earth's temperature, and then assign emissions rights among countries in such a way that will eventually limit temperature increases to an acceptable level. .
This would require increasing investments in energy research and development for new and improved technologies -- a process that needs to be supported by stronger public-private partnerships. .
Up to now, with only 15% of the world's population, rich countries have been responsible for more than 75% of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, and thus most of the environmental damage. .
However, it is the developing countries -- and thus the world's poor -- who are most vulnerable. .
It is unrealistic to ask poor countries, where more than 1.6 billion people do not have access to clean energy and technologies, to bear the costs associated with the much needed technological change. .
Working with partners, the World Bank is supporting financial strategies to assist developing countries in meeting the costs caused by climate change. .
To date, over $1 billion dollars in Global Environment Facility (GEF) grants, together with about $8 billion in co-financing, have been committed to programs related to climate change. .
While the regulatory mechanisms of both Kyoto and the European Trading Scheme have contributed to the establishment of an emerging market for carbon trading, interested parties are now concerned about the immediate future. .
Without a regulatory framework beyond 2012, the window of opportunity for initiating project-based transactions will close by 2006/2007. .
Given the long lead time between project preparation and the first benefits of emissions reductions, project developers have only a few years to act before carbon payments cease to make a meaningful contribution to project finance in the current context. .
Developing infrastructure projects is a long process that requires 3-7 years from identification, through licensing, financing, and construction, and finally to the first certification of carbon emission reductions. .
Therefore, projects need to be operational at the latest by 2007. .
The World Bank has been instrumental in advancing carbon finance as a viable development tool, and in facilitating private-sector participation in the market. .
The Bank is focused on representing the interests of its borrowing countries, helping them to develop assets for carbon trading according to their own priorities. .
But, without a commitment by governments to limit greenhouse gas emissions beyond 2012, the carbon market will remain uncertain, and the private sector -- vital to the market's success -- is unlikely to expand its participation in a meaningful and sustained way. .
According to a recent World Bank-supported survey of companies interested in carbon finance, only one in five respondents declared that they were interested in buying post-2012 emissions reductions. .
Now is the chance to look forward and enlist the global community -- with no exclusions, although with differentiated responsibilities -- in the pursuit of a more secure world, one that avoids the dire risks of environmental degradation and social conflict implied by inaction. .
State of the Art, or Art of the State? .
September is traditionally the time when opera companies and orchestras return to their home cities from Aix, Salzburg, Tanglewood, and countless other summer festivals. .
This rentrée is also marked (on both sides of the Atlantic) by the return of worries about how classical music is financed. .
American symphonic life is Euro-centric in almost every respect except for its funding. .
Whereas Americans depend upon tax-deductible private donations and box office receipts to finance live classical music, Europeans prefer direct government support for the arts. .
Ironically, while arts advocates in the United States have long argued for adoption of the "European model" -- which has produced a rich and varied artistic life for Europeans -- Europe is being forced to change its system of support to one that depends more on private money and the box office. .
Unfortunately, Europe's system of direct government financial support is falling victim to Europe's slow economic growth and budget deficits. .
Particularly for those countries that have adopted the euro, government spending on the arts will be constrained for some time by the requirement that fiscal deficits be kept to 3% of GDP. .
The resulting pressure on Europe's performing arts institutions is causing concern at various different levels. .
Traditionally, Europe's social democracies have preferred allocating scarce goods and services like concerts and operas by queues (financed by huge subsidies to keep prices low) rather than by willingness to pay. .
Now, this will change. .
Performing arts advocates in Europe point to the US where, among other things, music directors of even major orchestras are now expected to fully participate in fundraising activities and be active in the local community on the orchestras behalf. .
The same thing, they fear, will happen in Europe. .
Some conductors, not wanting to carry a tin cup as they wave their batons, have rejected important posts in the US for this reason, feeling that it would interfere with their art. .
Daniel Barenboim is rumored to have left the Chicago Symphony Orchestra in part because he objected to the fundraising demands that were being made of him. .
But US experience shows that getting artistic leaders like orchestra music directors to participate in fundraising need not be bad for the artistic side of the job. .
By announcing its determination to go ahead with a distant NMD, the US has created political turbulence which it must address now if major damage is to be avoided. .
The New Baby Boomers .
Alienated and unemployed youth are a concern everywhere. .
They pose a particular challenge in the developing world, where a demographic bulge equal to the great "baby boom" that occurred in the West at the end of World War II is growing. .
But the post-war era in the world's most developed countries was one of unprecedented prosperity for the baby boom generation, which is now nearing retirement. .
Will the future be as promising for the developing world's billion-plus young people between the ages of 12 and 24? .
Throughout the developing world, governments urgently need to devise the right mix of investments and policies to encourage their young people to get an education, find work, stay healthy, form families, and exercise citizenship. .
The payoff is huge if they get it right: accelerated development as economies reap the benefits of a burgeoning working-age population and lower dependency ratios. .
In East Asia, this "demographic dividend" is believed to have generated more than a quarter of the region's economic growth. .
Developing countries have already invested heavily in children. .
The research noted the conditions and triggers needed to facilitate the self-assembly of small opportunistic groups and enable them to act like large companies. .
The most important strategic goal of my office is that people learn how to defend their rights better, and to make the authorities take the complaints of ordinary Russians into consideration. .
Sadly, most bureaucrats still look upon human rights values with disdain. .
But the real problem for my office is neither ignorance nor legal infirmity, it is that in an under-developed legal system such as Russia's, my authority is mostly personal, and requires help from the mass media. .
Because concepts of human rights remain rudimentary, the best that can be hoped for is that awareness will slowly begin to take hold. .
My tactical goal is thus to raise the public profile of the ombudsman's office, in order to win more respect and recognition by both citizens and the state. .
This will be all but impossible without cooperation with non-governmental human rights organizations in Russia. .
Indeed, I view one of my tasks as being to facilitate contacts between these groups and the authorities. .
The government's response to these efforts will be an important indicator of whether and to what extent Putin's administration intends to include human and political rights within its so-called "dictatorship of law." .
The Revolutionary Conservative Pope .
Their young people are therefore better-educated and healthier than previous generations. .
Twenty-five years ago, Poland's people were stunned by the choice of their compatriot, Cardinal Karol Wojtyla of Cracow, as Pope. .
Some were frightened, others wept with joy. .
Here, said a prominent writer, was "Poland's second baptism." .
But even in our euphoria, we did not expect how much the new Pope would change not only Poland, but the world. .
His first return visit to his native country soon afterwards showed to all the world the new Pope's power. .
Communist police disappeared from the main streets of Warsaw, yet the streets became models of order. .
After decades of disempowerment, Poles suddenly regained their capacity for self-determination. .
In saying aloud that "there can be no just Europe without an independent Poland on its map," the Pope effectively swept away the unjust postwar settlement that had subjugated Poland to Soviet power. .
Then, in Auschwitz, the Pope said: "I speak in the name of everyone whose rights go unrecognized and violated anywhere in the world, I speak because I am bound, we are all bound, by truth." .
On that spot, that Golgotha of modern times, he called the Poles, who remembered dear ones gassed to death in Auschwitz's crematoria as well as those frozen into glass in Siberia's concentration camps, to a brotherhood devoted to struggle against even justified hatred and revenge. .
More than 80% of children now attend primary school, up from 50% in 1970, and infant mortality has fallen from more than 10% to 6.5% over the same period. .
Some see in the Pope the person responsible for a religious revival; others see a man of peace. .
Some see a defender of the poor, others a critic of liberation theology. .
For the people of Poland, John Paul II, by making human rights the central subject of his teaching, will forever be the man who gave us courage and hope, who restored our historical identity. .
Indeed, the central feature of the first decade of the Pope's reign was his struggle against dictatorship--Communist dictatorship in particular. .
The strategy formulated by the Pope for the Catholic Church, and his ability to mobilize millions of believers in its cause, meant that no one could ever again repeat Stalin's question: "How many divisions does the Pope have?" .
John Paul II demonstrated that moral force was a weapon potent enough to undo Yalta's division of the world. .
Perhaps in part because of their strong anticommunist stance, the Polish Church and John Paul II are often branded as "conservative." .
The accusation is meant to suggest that the Church cannot live comfortably with a pluralist democracy. .
To be sure, in the struggle against Communism, the Polish Church was, indeed, conservative--and thank God for that! .
It was conservative in its absolute fidelity to evangelical values, to the truth of faith, to its historical identity. .
But now governments must go beyond investments in children and begin supporting the new generation of young people. .
For the system of official atheism and legalized mendacity, the Church was a living rebuke. .
With Communism gone, however, the problem confronted by John Paul II and his Church today is this: in what language can evangelical values be articulated in a world where evil is not incarnated in a political system but is diffused in individual souls? .
What is the Pope's message for the postcommunist world he helped create? .
John Paul II undoubtedly keeps a distance from liberal economic ideas and the liberal state, which he often charges with permissiveness and moral relativism. .
A critique of individualism in the name of collective values occurs frequently in the Pope's pronouncements. .
He sees the failings of liberalism as particularly pernicious in postcommunist countries. .
The market economy, despite its practical achievements, seems to him oftentimes to lack a heart and a human face. .
He sees the market as favoring entrepreneurship over human solidarity. .
So John Paul II is no enthusiast of modern Western civilization, with its divorce from the world of values, and he contrasts with it the moral sensitivity of societies with fresh memories of decades of dictatorship. .
Like Alexander Solzhenitsyn, the Pope tends to believe that it was above all in resistance to totalitarianism that man could become truly free and preserve the fundamental values of civilization. .
Indeed, even in countries with high primary-school completion rates, many young people do not attend secondary school. .
I confess that I view the heritage of Communism with more skepticism. .
Totalitarian pressure did, indeed, form exceptional people such as John Paul II and Alexander Solzhenitsyn, people for whom religious faith bought freedom from mendacity and solitude. .
But it did the same for Andrei Sakharov and Vaclav Havel, who defended their supreme values with reference to, and in the language of, lay humanism. .
For most people, however, life under totalitarian dictatorship was not ennobling; it was, rather, a daily immersion in lies, spiritual depravity, and material corruption. .
This is why postcommunist societies do not demonstrate any nobility or disinterestedness that seriously contrasts with the West. .
Communism's defeat left a huge black hole in communities' souls, which is now being filled with nationalism, bigotry, and Western consumerism. .
But John Paul II's basic intuition is correct: the postcommunist world--East and West--is in spiritual crisis, and the Pope wants to shake it into realizing the importance of higher values. .
Indeed, by his words and example, the Pope disrupts the world: it wants to live in wealth and comfort; he reminds us that we must also live in dignity. .
In the end, John Paul II does not fit neatly into any category and often represents a meeting of opposites: rejection of compromise with ecumenism, toughness with warmth, intellectual openness with insistence on theological orthodoxy. .
He is a conservative who loves freedom and a "peacemonger" who condemns injustice, but who reminds us that mercy is more important than justice. .
Young people account for half of all new HIV infections. .
In this, he personifies the paradox that is Christianity: unbreakable and lasting principles joined by understanding and tolerance. .
And, in the Middle East and North Africa region, about a quarter of all young people are unemployed. .
These problems raise thorny questions: What prevents more young people from attending secondary school? .
Is it because they are sometimes close to being illiterate even after primary school, or because it is unaffordable? .
Why don't more young people learn how to lower the risk of getting HIV/AIDS? .
Why do businesses in these countries complain of a lack of skilled workers when so many university students are jobless? .
To build successful youth-friendly policies, governments need to focus on three policy areas: expanding opportunities, enhancing capabilities, and providing second chances for young people. .
Governments must broaden opportunities for young people by improving access to, and the quality of, health and educational services. .
We know that the full benefit of primary school is realized only when children go on to secondary school. .
Yet many young people are ill prepared for secondary school, and places are scarce. .
Today's employers want highly skilled workers. .
More than 20% of all firms, in countries as diverse as Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Estonia, and Zambia, rate inadequate skills and education of workers as a major or a severe obstacle. .
If young people are not to become stuck in dead-end jobs, or end up without jobs at all, they need better education and skills that match those needed by employers. .
Several countries now facilitate access to secondary schooling, in particular through "conditional cash transfer programs," which offer a stipend to poor families whose children regularly attend school. .
These programs have successfully increased secondary school enrollment in countries like Mexico, Ecuador, Bangladesh, and Cambodia. .
For these programs to work, however, children must be ready to enter secondary education. .
Yet, in Morocco, for example, more than 80% of school children complete primary school, but fewer than 20% have mastered the material. .
Second, policies should support young people as they strive to make good decisions. .
Governments cannot substitute for parents or for communities, but they can encourage young people and their families to invest in themselves. .
Armed with the right information and incentives, young people can make better decisions about their health and education. .
In Cameroon, Horizon Jeunes, a reproductive health program that targets urban youth, increased young people's knowledge of reproductive health and successfully changed their behavior, with condom use among females increasing from 58% to 76% in the treatment group. .
Similarly, the rate at which eighth graders from the Dominican Republic entered upper secondary levels increased when they were simply told how much more those who finished high school earned -- an amount they had vastly underestimated. .
Bangladesh's Female Secondary Stipend Program was successful in helping girls aged 11 to 14 to delay marriage and remain in school. .
Governments must also begin to offer "second chances" for young people who have fallen behind due to difficult circumstances or poor choices. .
Such programs must be well designed, targeted, and coordinated to give the right incentives to beneficiaries. .
For example, sub-Saharan Africa has thousands of young combatants -- 100,000 in Sudan alone -- who hope to reconstruct their lives in peacetime but clearly require skills training and jobs, as well as medical and psychological support. .
Focusing political will and the efforts of young people themselves to expand opportunities, enhance capabilities, and provide second chances can help countries make the most of today's demographic advantage. .
Countries can either harness this growth -- and in so doing, transform their development prospects -- or face the risk of an alienated generation embittered by the unfulfilled chance of a better future. .
Down with Euro-Paternalism .
Italy's presidency of the European Union bears an enormous responsibility, namely reinvigorating enlargement as the key aspect of the new EU. .
A good place to start would be to push for a different attitude on accession countries' adoption of the Euro. .
Indeed, EU institutions' current paternalistic stance towards the accession countries threatens to create a two-tier Europe that will complicate the task of integration. .
The accession countries have upheld their end of the bargain, achieving a degree of trade integration with EU countries that is even higher than many current members. .
Three of them--Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania--have currency boards or a fixed exchange rate with the Euro, as does Bulgaria, which is expected to enter the EU in 2007. .
The others have declared for several years their interest in adopting the Euro early on, in some cases unilaterally, even before entry into the EU--a position openly supported by the National Bank of Poland, and less forcefully by the National Bank of Hungary and the Czech National Bank. .
But, despite their progress in bringing their inflation and interest rates closer to EU levels, many candidate countries fear that with the full opening up to capital flows--a requirement of accession--they will be exposed to the risk of sudden stops in capital flows and currency crises. .
There is also a general reluctance to report unfavorable drug effects. .
Physicians may feel guilty and fear litigation, drug companies worry about the threat to corporate profits and regulatory agencies must face the question: "Why was the drug approved in the first place?" .
It is especially difficult to attribute an adverse reaction to a drug if the medical event is common in the user's age group or in the condition being treated. .
Because the risk of heart attacks is high in older people, many of whom have arthritic pain requiring treatment with painkillers, it took six years to link Cox-2 inhibitors to a two- to three-fold increase in the risk of heart attacks. .
A recent Harris Survey in the US concluded that 60% of adults are either not confident at all or not very confident that drug makers will publicly and in a timely manner disclose data on their products' adverse effects. .
Their skepticism is hardly groundless: internal documents obtained in recent lawsuits reveal that drug companies often fail to submit critical safety information to regulatory agencies, as required by law, and fail to communicate such information to physicians and patients. .
One problem is that the consequences for neglecting drug safety are non-existing or minimal. .
The time has come to get serious: .
· Citizens and government must make drug safety a priority and commit adequate resources to fixing the problems; .
· Penalties for drug companies' failure to report and communicate safety information must be increased dramatically if they are to serve as effective deterrents; .
· Regulatory agencies need enforcement authority so that stricter rules can be implemented; .
· The drug-safety problem must be seen as a systemic failure. .
It is unfair to blame clinicians for serious ADR's, particularly in the absence of complete safety information. .
Fixing the problem requires full cooperation from clinicians, but this requires ending their fear of litigation. .
This approach works well in the airline industry: pilots reporting near misses are not penalized; .
· Patients need to be better informed about the risks of prescription drugs and more involved in detection and reporting. .
Package inserts in fine print are useless; .
· Monitoring of ADR's must be more pro-active. .
This requires more funding, which should come from the main beneficiary of drug sales -- the pharmaceutical industry -- just as oversight of aviation safety is funded by the airlines. .
Above all, the success of any comprehensive effort to improve drug safety hinges upon establishing an independent office of drug safety to advocate, coordinate, and provide direction to the regulatory agenda. .
Such an office exists in the United Kingdom. .
Other governments should follow this model in order to fulfill their neglected role as guardian of public health. .
The Virtual Enemy .
Five years have passed since the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington of September, 2001, yet it seems that policymakers have learned little about how terrorist cells operate, and what their weaknesses are. .
The Bush administration still uses the phrase "war on terror" and behaves as though it really is a war, the ordinary kind where one government fights another. .
Yet after five years of military exertions, strategies based on targeting a united aggressor have only made the situation worse. .
It is time to understand the new, emerging model of conflict. .
In order to make the "war" paradigm fit, the Bush administration alludes to al-Qaeda as a centrally directed enemy. .
In fact, there is now no master planner or funder of terrorist activities. .
The Madrid, London, and Bali attacks, as well as several thwarted operations in the United States and Britain, were all characterized by their dispersed organization. .
Independently generated plots emerged and used ad hoc resources, often within the target country. .
Those small operations also lacked a common internal design. .
Terrorist motivations differ from cell to cell, even from person to person. .
Individuals can be involved for profit and power, or for political and religious reasons, while others participate for hate or thrills. .
Moreover, there are vast differences in terms of risks, rewards, and imperatives as one moves up the organizational chain, or jumps from cell to cell. .
Conventional military models are geared to decapitate something that, in this case, has no head. .
The characteristics of this new structure have already been studied in a very different context. .
Terrorism is a violent version of an "agile virtual enterprise." .
A virtual enterprise is any small group that self-assembles into an organization that is just large enough to accomplish the collective intention. .
Virtual enterprises are unusually innovative, and, in the business sector, they are possibly the only system that can build a one-off product well. .
A conspicuous example already exists in the movie production industry. .
In fact, they are probably the commercial model of the future. .
The benefits of virtual enterprises stem from their lightness over stability. .
At present, most of the price of any product supports the huge, inefficient organization that assembled it. .
Nearly all the creativity and problem solving occurs in small companies and is later "integrated" by mega-corporations, which have an expensive and vulnerable infrastructure, and keep most of the profit. .
This model is the current basis of the business world, just as centralization has also been the favored defense strategy. .
When you buy a car from General Motors, 80 cents from each dollar goes to GM, which mostly only manages itself. .
The small suppliers actually provide you with 80% of the value and innovation but only receive 20% of the reward. .
Ironically, extensive research into alternative models was funded through the US Department of Defense, which, as the world's largest buyer of complex machinery, wanted better, cheaper and more tailored goods. .
Politicians don't understand science, and rarely seek the advice of scientists and engineers in addressing major issues. .
Everything is viewed as politics and votes, not as technical problems requiring technological expertise, which is why Africa's poverty is so often attributed to corruption rather than to ecological challenges. .
It is easy to dismiss the suggestion that technology can save the day. .
After all, technological advance also requires good governance, market forces, effective universities, and more. .
Politics will still play its role. .
Nevertheless, it's time to recognize that governments are ill-equipped to understand the sophisticated technological challenges and opportunities facing the world, and that new ways are needed to ensure that science and technology are given the prominence needed to address a wide range of increasingly urgent global problems. .
Now is the time for every major international agency and national government to assume responsibility for gaining the scientific and technological expertise that they will need in the twenty-first century. .
Getting Latin America Unstuck .
One of the world economy's biggest puzzles is Latin America's poor performance. .
Since the early 1980's, Latin America has been stuck, with per capita incomes growing slowly (if at all) in most of the region, and with one big crisis following another. .
Here, then, is a modest proposal that applies to all democracies: the marketplace of ideas works better if it is easier for citizens to see the trade-offs between accuracy and entertainment, or between accuracy and party loyalty. .
Wouldn't they be more likely to read pundits with better track records? .
If so, pundits might adapt to accountability by showing more humility, and political debate might begin to sound less shrill. .
Granted, it is not easy to create methods of keeping score that are credible across the spectrum of reasonable opinion. .
But in a world where, as Yeats said, "and the best lack all conviction, while the worst are full of passionate intensity," it is worth trying. .
What Next for Europe? .
In many ways, 2005 has been Europe's annus horibilis. .
It began well, when Spanish voters approved the draft European Union constitution, but it turned sour when French and Dutch voters spurned it soon after. .
Those votes partly reflected displeasure with domestic policies, and partly disappointment with the way governments conduct European affairs. .
Governments promptly obliged with more of the same. .
Many policies have been tried, especially trade liberalization, privatization of inefficient state enterprises, and budgetary reforms. .
Within days of the votes, they failed to agree on the EU budget for 2007-13. .
French and British leaders engaged in a heated quarrel that derailed the subsequent summit, before Britain assumed the rotating six-month EU presidency in July. .
Normally, countries use their EU presidencies to display their ability to solve problems and move the Union forward. .
But, as of early December, Britain has remained dormant. .
Besides burying the draft constitution, it has largely sidestepped the budget issue. .
Chances that it gets the budget approved this year are slim, and, unless the dispute is resolved soon, the Union will not have an operational budget by 2007. .
Even if a budget is adopted, there is no lack of depressing business for the Austrian presidency, which starts on January 1. .
The deepest problem is Europe's inability to grow at more than a snail's pace and to provide jobs to its citizens. .
This is mostly due to the Big Three -- France, Germany, and Italy -- which produce 70% of Europe's GDP. .
The collective response, adopted in 2000, has been the "Lisbon Strategy," which aims at making the EU "the most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy in the world" by 2010. .
Yet something is holding Latin America back. .
More realistically, it is designed to provide governments with the incentive to undertake the reforms that stimulate economic growth and productivity. .
That means facing down the myriad interest groups -- from industry lobbies to trade unions and entrenched bureaucracies -- that have (so far) successfully protected their turfs. .
The strategy rests on peer pressure, naming and shaming governments that fail to make progress. .
In practice, however, peer pressure has become peer collusion. .
When EU leaders met last spring to assess progress, they pitifully recognized that the Lisbon Strategy's goal was unlikely to be met. .
The best that they could do now would be to dump the pretense of a strategy and carry on with the other business. .
Unfortunately, the host of the 2000 summit was José Manuel Barroso, then Prime Minister of Portugal and current President of the European Commission, who has staked his presidency on the Lisbon Strategy. .
Expect him to push on hopelessly. .
One of the few good ideas contained in the Lisbon Strategy was to remove barriers to trade in services. .
Intra-European competition in services is restricted by innumerable national regulations that, for instance, strictly determine the requirements for becoming a hairdresser or a plumber. .
The lack of vigorous growth is all the more bewildering in view of Latin America's many advantages and social successes. .
One of the defining features of the past decades is the sharp increase in services productivity in the US; none of that happened in Europe. .
Guess why. .
Because services account for 70% of European GDP, the potential impact from enhanced competition is substantial. .
But removing protection is always politically difficult. .
The European Commission submitted a proposal in 2005 -- just as the constitution was being put up for a vote. .
Not surprisingly, the proposal was quickly shelved. .
Now, with countless private interest groups trying to water it down into irrelevance, the battle will be firmly on the EU's agenda in 2006. .
At the same time, Europe is again blocking progress in the Doha round of world trade talks, with the farmers' lobby fighting to preserve its subsidies. .
Many governments are so fearful of their farmers that they see no other option than to hold their ground, no matter what. .
Europe has agreed to a single trade policy. .
Natural resources are plentiful, with vast amounts of fertile land. .
When disagreements run as deep as they do on agriculture, there can be no give-and-take of the kind that allows for successful negotiations. .
There is little reason for optimism. .
And what next for the ECB, which has just nudged up interest rates by 0.25%, after 30 months on hold. .
Experts can disagree about whether the move was premature, but no one agrees with the many political leaders who have argued that the tiny hike will derail the timid resumption of economic growth. .
The sharpness of political attacks on the ECB might trigger dangerous talk about restricting its independence. .
While such a move is out of the question -- it would require a change in the European Treaty -- the noise is unhealthy. .
It distracts the ECB, adds to the impression that Europe is bad, and, more importantly, will be used by ineffective governments as a scapegoat for their failings. .
Expect more ECB-bashing. .
Is Europe stuck? .
The current team of leaders has been an enormous disappointment. .
Health conditions are reasonably good, and all Latin American countries have made headway against illiteracy, with most reaching 90% adult literacy or higher. .
But as they fade away, there could be some light at the end of the tunnel. .
Moreover, fertility rates have fallen sharply, to a point where populations in many countries will probably level off in coming decades. .
Women's status has improved, and girls enjoy equal access to education, with even higher enrollment rates than boys in many countries. .
Latin America may be known for its "macho" culture, but women increasingly participate in the labor force and attain prominent political and social positions. .
Latin America boasts still other long-term advantages. .
Most people live near the coasts, with good access to international trade, and most live in cities - another advantage for growth. .
Indeed, the region is not poor by international standards, but rather stuck in the middle-income range between the world's poorest places and the high-income countries of North America, Europe, and East Asia. .
What, then, accounts for the puzzling lack of real growth over the past 25 years? .
I blame two unsolved, but solvable, problems. .
The first has been around for centuries: the social divisions that trace their origins back to the European conquest over Native Americans in the sixteenth century. .
More than most places, Latin America was born in violent conquest. .
Europeans subdued Amerindian populations and also brought in massive numbers of slaves from Africa, especially to the Caribbean basin and Brazil. .
Societies became racially and ethnically complex, as the European, Amerindian, and African populations intermarried, but the long-term trend of European dominance, indigenous and Afro-American subservience, and entrenched poverty became a scar on Latin American societies. .
Even today, income inequality in Latin America is among the highest in the world, reflecting the old patterns of ethnic and racial division. .
Income inequality casts a long shadow. .
The rich have long fought against taxation needed to increase investment in the education and health of the poor, perpetuating deep social divisions and leaving many people without the health and skills that global competitiveness requires. .
The situation today is improving in some places - such as Brazil - which augurs well for the future. .
In other places - for example, Guatemala and parts of the Andean region - social divisions remain fraught with violence and distrust. .
Beyond this, a basic failure of economic strategy has been largely overlooked, one that is reflected in a major difference between public policy discussions in Latin America and Asia. .
In Asia, public debate is about technology: how can Asia catch up? .
Asian governments relentlessly act to raise the scientific and technological capacities of their economies. .
In Latin America, the global technological revolution is much less discussed, and national policies to promote science and technology are rarely given prominence. .
The result is that Latin America has failed to benefit adequately from the global technological revolutions. .
Asian developing countries are now producers of computers, semiconductors, pharmaceuticals, and software. .
By contrast, even Latin America's star performer, Chile, remains largely a resource-based export economy, with a heavy concentration in copper and agricultural exports. .
These sectors are technologically sophisticated, but form a narrow base for long-term development. .
The situation is far from hopeless. .
Brazil has demonstrated the ability to be a technological export power. .
It has succeeded, notably, in exporting airplanes and many consumer durable goods. .
Mexico, too, has begun to mobilize significant technological prowess. .
Argentina, Chile, and other countries could become high-tech agricultural producers, in the forefront of agro-biotechnology for example, if they put their minds to it. .
Still, Latin American countries have not yet tried to foster a technological revolution, certainly not with the focus, skill, commitment, and financing that Asian countries have shown. .
Such a push could play a major role in jump-starting economic growth. .
Such a policy would entail committing to a major increase in spending on research and development, as Asian developing countries have done. .
Latin American countries should aim to increase spending to around 2% of GNP (from 0.5% currently), partly through public support for laboratories and universities and partly through incentives for private-sector R&D. They should roll out the red carpet for high-tech multinational firms, just as Asia has done. .
They should also increase their focus on scientific and technological training and encourage a higher proportion of students to go on to university education. .
We are, however, still not a global village. .
After first disputing that there was scientific evidence of the problem, the largest polluter in the world, the US, is now simply refusing to do anything about it (other than preaching voluntary restraint—of which there is little evidence, at least in America). .
The international community has yet to figure out what to do with an aberrant member who fails to live up to its responsibilities as a global citizen. .
Optimists say that technology will solve the problem. .
Realists observe that in the long race between the environment and technology, it appears that technology has so far been losing. .
Nature, as we have learned from the tsunami, has its own timetable. .
Unless we learn how to respect it, we will all miss the boat. .
How Accurate Are Your Pet Pundits? .
Every day, experts bombard us with their views on topics as varied as Iraqi insurgents, Bolivian coca growers, European central bankers, and North Korea's Politburo. .
But how much credibility should we attach to the opinions of experts? .
The sanguine view is that as long as those selling expertise compete vigorously for the attention of discriminating buyers (the mass media), market mechanisms will assure quality control. .
Pundits who make it into newspaper opinion pages or onto television and radio must have good track records; otherwise, they would have been weeded out. .
Skeptics, however, warn that the mass media dictate the voices we hear and are less interested in reasoned debate than in catering to popular prejudices. .
As a result, fame could be negatively, not positively, correlated with long-run accuracy. .
Until recently, no one knew who is right, because no one was keeping score. .
But the results of a 20-year research project now suggest that the skeptics are closer to the truth. .
I describe the project in detail in my book Expert Political Judgment: How good is it? .
How can we know? .
The basic idea was to solicit thousands of predictions from hundreds of experts about the fates of dozens of countries, and then score the predictions for accuracy. .
We find that the media not only fail to weed out bad ideas, but that they often favor bad ideas, especially when the truth is too messy to be packaged neatly. .
The evidence falls into two categories. .
First, as the skeptics warned, when hordes of pundits are jostling for the limelight, many are tempted to claim that they know more than they do. .
Boom and doom pundits are the most reliable over-claimers. .
Between 1985 and 2005, boomsters made 10-year forecasts that exaggerated the chances of big positive changes in both financial markets (e.g., a Dow Jones Industrial Average of 36,000) and world politics (e.g., tranquility in the Middle East and dynamic growth in sub-Saharan Africa). .
They assigned probabilities of 65% to rosy scenarios that materialized only 15% of the time. .
In the same period, doomsters performed even more poorly, exaggerating the chances of negative changes in all the same places where boomsters accentuated the positive, plus several more (I still await the impending disintegration of Canada, Nigeria, India, Indonesia, South Africa, Belgium, and Sudan). .
They assigned probabilities of 70% to bleak scenarios that materialized only 12% of the time. .
Second, again as the skeptics warned, over-claimers rarely pay penalties for being wrong. .
Indeed, the media shower lavish attention on over-claimers while neglecting their humbler colleagues. .
We can see this process in sharp relief when, following the philosopher Sir Isaiah Berlin, we classify experts as "hedgehogs" or "foxes." .
Hedgehogs are big-idea thinkers in love with grand theories: libertarianism, Marxism, environmentalism, etc. .
Their self-confidence can be infectious. .
They know how to stoke momentum in an argument by multiplying reasons why they are right and others are wrong. .
That wins them media acclaim. .
But they don't know when to slam the mental brakes by making concessions to other points of view. .
They take their theories too seriously. .
The result: hedgehogs make more mistakes, but they pile up more hits on Google. .
Eclectic foxes are better at curbing their ideological enthusiasms. .
They are comfortable with protracted uncertainty about who is right even in bitter debates, conceding gaps in their knowledge and granting legitimacy to opposing views. .
They sprinkle their conversations with linguistic qualifiers that limit the reach of their arguments: ‘but,' ‘however,' ‘although.' .
Because they avoid over-simplification, foxes make fewer mistakes. .
Foxes will often agree with hedgehogs up to a point, before complicating things: "Yes, my colleague is right that the Saudi monarchy is vulnerable, but remember that coups are rare and that the government commands many means of squelching opposition." .
Imagine your job as a media executive depends on expanding your viewing audience. .
Whom would you pick: an expert who balances conflicting arguments and concludes that the likeliest outcome is more of the same, or an expert who gets viewers on the edge of their seats over radical Islamists seizing control and causing oil prices to soar? .
In short, the qualities that make foxes more accurate also make them less popular. .
At this point, uncharitable skeptics chortle that we get the media we deserve. .
But that is unfair. .
No society has yet created a widely trusted method for keeping score on the punditocracy. .
Even citizens who prize accuracy have little way of knowing that they are sacrificing it when they switch channels from boring foxes to charismatic hedgehogs. .
Politicians don't understand science, and rarely seek the advice of scientists and engineers in addressing major issues. .
Everything is viewed as politics and votes, not as technical problems requiring technological expertise, which is why Africa's poverty is so often attributed to corruption rather than to ecological challenges. .
It is easy to dismiss the suggestion that technology can save the day. .
After all, technological advance also requires good governance, market forces, effective universities, and more. .
Politics will still play its role. .
Nevertheless, it's time to recognize that governments are ill-equipped to understand the sophisticated technological challenges and opportunities facing the world, and that new ways are needed to ensure that science and technology are given the prominence needed to address a wide range of increasingly urgent global problems. .
Now is the time for every major international agency and national government to assume responsibility for gaining the scientific and technological expertise that they will need in the twenty-first century. .
Getting Latin America Unstuck .
One of the world economy's biggest puzzles is Latin America's poor performance. .
Since the early 1980's, Latin America has been stuck, with per capita incomes growing slowly (if at all) in most of the region, and with one big crisis following another. .
Here, then, is a modest proposal that applies to all democracies: the marketplace of ideas works better if it is easier for citizens to see the trade-offs between accuracy and entertainment, or between accuracy and party loyalty. .
Wouldn't they be more likely to read pundits with better track records? .
If so, pundits might adapt to accountability by showing more humility, and political debate might begin to sound less shrill. .
Granted, it is not easy to create methods of keeping score that are credible across the spectrum of reasonable opinion. .
But in a world where, as Yeats said, "and the best lack all conviction, while the worst are full of passionate intensity," it is worth trying. .
What Next for Europe? .
In many ways, 2005 has been Europe's annus horibilis. .
It began well, when Spanish voters approved the draft European Union constitution, but it turned sour when French and Dutch voters spurned it soon after. .
Those votes partly reflected displeasure with domestic policies, and partly disappointment with the way governments conduct European affairs. .
Governments promptly obliged with more of the same. .
Many policies have been tried, especially trade liberalization, privatization of inefficient state enterprises, and budgetary reforms. .
Within days of the votes, they failed to agree on the EU budget for 2007-13. .
French and British leaders engaged in a heated quarrel that derailed the subsequent summit, before Britain assumed the rotating six-month EU presidency in July. .
Normally, countries use their EU presidencies to display their ability to solve problems and move the Union forward. .
But, as of early December, Britain has remained dormant. .
Besides burying the draft constitution, it has largely sidestepped the budget issue. .
Chances that it gets the budget approved this year are slim, and, unless the dispute is resolved soon, the Union will not have an operational budget by 2007. .
Even if a budget is adopted, there is no lack of depressing business for the Austrian presidency, which starts on January 1. .
The deepest problem is Europe's inability to grow at more than a snail's pace and to provide jobs to its citizens. .
This is mostly due to the Big Three -- France, Germany, and Italy -- which produce 70% of Europe's GDP. .
The collective response, adopted in 2000, has been the "Lisbon Strategy," which aims at making the EU "the most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy in the world" by 2010. .
Yet something is holding Latin America back. .
More realistically, it is designed to provide governments with the incentive to undertake the reforms that stimulate economic growth and productivity. .
That means facing down the myriad interest groups -- from industry lobbies to trade unions and entrenched bureaucracies -- that have (so far) successfully protected their turfs. .
The strategy rests on peer pressure, naming and shaming governments that fail to make progress. .
In practice, however, peer pressure has become peer collusion. .
When EU leaders met last spring to assess progress, they pitifully recognized that the Lisbon Strategy's goal was unlikely to be met. .
The best that they could do now would be to dump the pretense of a strategy and carry on with the other business. .
Unfortunately, the host of the 2000 summit was José Manuel Barroso, then Prime Minister of Portugal and current President of the European Commission, who has staked his presidency on the Lisbon Strategy. .
Expect him to push on hopelessly. .
One of the few good ideas contained in the Lisbon Strategy was to remove barriers to trade in services. .
Intra-European competition in services is restricted by innumerable national regulations that, for instance, strictly determine the requirements for becoming a hairdresser or a plumber. .
The lack of vigorous growth is all the more bewildering in view of Latin America's many advantages and social successes. .
One of the defining features of the past decades is the sharp increase in services productivity in the US; none of that happened in Europe. .
Guess why. .
Because services account for 70% of European GDP, the potential impact from enhanced competition is substantial. .
But removing protection is always politically difficult. .
The European Commission submitted a proposal in 2005 -- just as the constitution was being put up for a vote. .
Not surprisingly, the proposal was quickly shelved. .
Now, with countless private interest groups trying to water it down into irrelevance, the battle will be firmly on the EU's agenda in 2006. .
At the same time, Europe is again blocking progress in the Doha round of world trade talks, with the farmers' lobby fighting to preserve its subsidies. .
Many governments are so fearful of their farmers that they see no other option than to hold their ground, no matter what. .
Europe has agreed to a single trade policy. .
Natural resources are plentiful, with vast amounts of fertile land. .
When disagreements run as deep as they do on agriculture, there can be no give-and-take of the kind that allows for successful negotiations. .
There is little reason for optimism. .
And what next for the ECB, which has just nudged up interest rates by 0.25%, after 30 months on hold. .
Experts can disagree about whether the move was premature, but no one agrees with the many political leaders who have argued that the tiny hike will derail the timid resumption of economic growth. .
The sharpness of political attacks on the ECB might trigger dangerous talk about restricting its independence. .
While such a move is out of the question -- it would require a change in the European Treaty -- the noise is unhealthy. .
It distracts the ECB, adds to the impression that Europe is bad, and, more importantly, will be used by ineffective governments as a scapegoat for their failings. .
Expect more ECB-bashing. .
Is Europe stuck? .
The current team of leaders has been an enormous disappointment. .
Health conditions are reasonably good, and all Latin American countries have made headway against illiteracy, with most reaching 90% adult literacy or higher. .
But as they fade away, there could be some light at the end of the tunnel. .
Moreover, fertility rates have fallen sharply, to a point where populations in many countries will probably level off in coming decades. .
Women's status has improved, and girls enjoy equal access to education, with even higher enrollment rates than boys in many countries. .
Latin America may be known for its "macho" culture, but women increasingly participate in the labor force and attain prominent political and social positions. .
Latin America boasts still other long-term advantages. .
Most people live near the coasts, with good access to international trade, and most live in cities - another advantage for growth. .
Indeed, the region is not poor by international standards, but rather stuck in the middle-income range between the world's poorest places and the high-income countries of North America, Europe, and East Asia. .
What, then, accounts for the puzzling lack of real growth over the past 25 years? .
I blame two unsolved, but solvable, problems. .
The first has been around for centuries: the social divisions that trace their origins back to the European conquest over Native Americans in the sixteenth century. .
More than most places, Latin America was born in violent conquest. .
Europeans subdued Amerindian populations and also brought in massive numbers of slaves from Africa, especially to the Caribbean basin and Brazil. .
Societies became racially and ethnically complex, as the European, Amerindian, and African populations intermarried, but the long-term trend of European dominance, indigenous and Afro-American subservience, and entrenched poverty became a scar on Latin American societies. .
Even today, income inequality in Latin America is among the highest in the world, reflecting the old patterns of ethnic and racial division. .
Income inequality casts a long shadow. .
The rich have long fought against taxation needed to increase investment in the education and health of the poor, perpetuating deep social divisions and leaving many people without the health and skills that global competitiveness requires. .
The situation today is improving in some places - such as Brazil - which augurs well for the future. .
In other places - for example, Guatemala and parts of the Andean region - social divisions remain fraught with violence and distrust. .
Beyond this, a basic failure of economic strategy has been largely overlooked, one that is reflected in a major difference between public policy discussions in Latin America and Asia. .
In Asia, public debate is about technology: how can Asia catch up? .
Asian governments relentlessly act to raise the scientific and technological capacities of their economies. .
In Latin America, the global technological revolution is much less discussed, and national policies to promote science and technology are rarely given prominence. .
The result is that Latin America has failed to benefit adequately from the global technological revolutions. .
Asian developing countries are now producers of computers, semiconductors, pharmaceuticals, and software. .
By contrast, even Latin America's star performer, Chile, remains largely a resource-based export economy, with a heavy concentration in copper and agricultural exports. .
These sectors are technologically sophisticated, but form a narrow base for long-term development. .
The situation is far from hopeless. .
Brazil has demonstrated the ability to be a technological export power. .
It has succeeded, notably, in exporting airplanes and many consumer durable goods. .
Mexico, too, has begun to mobilize significant technological prowess. .
Argentina, Chile, and other countries could become high-tech agricultural producers, in the forefront of agro-biotechnology for example, if they put their minds to it. .
Still, Latin American countries have not yet tried to foster a technological revolution, certainly not with the focus, skill, commitment, and financing that Asian countries have shown. .
Such a push could play a major role in jump-starting economic growth. .
Such a policy would entail committing to a major increase in spending on research and development, as Asian developing countries have done. .
Latin American countries should aim to increase spending to around 2% of GNP (from 0.5% currently), partly through public support for laboratories and universities and partly through incentives for private-sector R&D. They should roll out the red carpet for high-tech multinational firms, just as Asia has done. .
They should also increase their focus on scientific and technological training and encourage a higher proportion of students to go on to university education. .
We are, however, still not a global village. .
After first disputing that there was scientific evidence of the problem, the largest polluter in the world, the US, is now simply refusing to do anything about it (other than preaching voluntary restraint—of which there is little evidence, at least in America). .
The international community has yet to figure out what to do with an aberrant member who fails to live up to its responsibilities as a global citizen. .
Optimists say that technology will solve the problem. .
Realists observe that in the long race between the environment and technology, it appears that technology has so far been losing. .
Nature, as we have learned from the tsunami, has its own timetable. .
Unless we learn how to respect it, we will all miss the boat. .
How Accurate Are Your Pet Pundits? .
Every day, experts bombard us with their views on topics as varied as Iraqi insurgents, Bolivian coca growers, European central bankers, and North Korea's Politburo. .
But how much credibility should we attach to the opinions of experts? .
The sanguine view is that as long as those selling expertise compete vigorously for the attention of discriminating buyers (the mass media), market mechanisms will assure quality control. .
Pundits who make it into newspaper opinion pages or onto television and radio must have good track records; otherwise, they would have been weeded out. .
Skeptics, however, warn that the mass media dictate the voices we hear and are less interested in reasoned debate than in catering to popular prejudices. .
As a result, fame could be negatively, not positively, correlated with long-run accuracy. .
Until recently, no one knew who is right, because no one was keeping score. .
But the results of a 20-year research project now suggest that the skeptics are closer to the truth. .
I describe the project in detail in my book Expert Political Judgment: How good is it? .
How can we know? .
The basic idea was to solicit thousands of predictions from hundreds of experts about the fates of dozens of countries, and then score the predictions for accuracy. .
We find that the media not only fail to weed out bad ideas, but that they often favor bad ideas, especially when the truth is too messy to be packaged neatly. .
The evidence falls into two categories. .
First, as the skeptics warned, when hordes of pundits are jostling for the limelight, many are tempted to claim that they know more than they do. .
Boom and doom pundits are the most reliable over-claimers. .
Between 1985 and 2005, boomsters made 10-year forecasts that exaggerated the chances of big positive changes in both financial markets (e.g., a Dow Jones Industrial Average of 36,000) and world politics (e.g., tranquility in the Middle East and dynamic growth in sub-Saharan Africa). .
They assigned probabilities of 65% to rosy scenarios that materialized only 15% of the time. .
In the same period, doomsters performed even more poorly, exaggerating the chances of negative changes in all the same places where boomsters accentuated the positive, plus several more (I still await the impending disintegration of Canada, Nigeria, India, Indonesia, South Africa, Belgium, and Sudan). .
They assigned probabilities of 70% to bleak scenarios that materialized only 12% of the time. .
Second, again as the skeptics warned, over-claimers rarely pay penalties for being wrong. .
Indeed, the media shower lavish attention on over-claimers while neglecting their humbler colleagues. .
We can see this process in sharp relief when, following the philosopher Sir Isaiah Berlin, we classify experts as "hedgehogs" or "foxes." .
Hedgehogs are big-idea thinkers in love with grand theories: libertarianism, Marxism, environmentalism, etc. .
Their self-confidence can be infectious. .
They know how to stoke momentum in an argument by multiplying reasons why they are right and others are wrong. .
That wins them media acclaim. .
But they don't know when to slam the mental brakes by making concessions to other points of view. .
They take their theories too seriously. .
The result: hedgehogs make more mistakes, but they pile up more hits on Google. .
Eclectic foxes are better at curbing their ideological enthusiasms. .
They are comfortable with protracted uncertainty about who is right even in bitter debates, conceding gaps in their knowledge and granting legitimacy to opposing views. .
They sprinkle their conversations with linguistic qualifiers that limit the reach of their arguments: ‘but,' ‘however,' ‘although.' .
Because they avoid over-simplification, foxes make fewer mistakes. .
Foxes will often agree with hedgehogs up to a point, before complicating things: "Yes, my colleague is right that the Saudi monarchy is vulnerable, but remember that coups are rare and that the government commands many means of squelching opposition." .
Imagine your job as a media executive depends on expanding your viewing audience. .
Whom would you pick: an expert who balances conflicting arguments and concludes that the likeliest outcome is more of the same, or an expert who gets viewers on the edge of their seats over radical Islamists seizing control and causing oil prices to soar? .
In short, the qualities that make foxes more accurate also make them less popular. .
At this point, uncharitable skeptics chortle that we get the media we deserve. .
But that is unfair. .
No society has yet created a widely trusted method for keeping score on the punditocracy. .
Even citizens who prize accuracy have little way of knowing that they are sacrificing it when they switch channels from boring foxes to charismatic hedgehogs. .
In Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel is obviously more positive on Europe and more pro-reform than her predecessor, but she is tied up in a grand coalition. .
In France, President Jacques Chirac, the epitome of a leader captured by his lobbies, is staggering impotently toward the end of his term in 2007. .
The two frontrunners to succeed him, Dominique de Villepin and Nicolas Sarkozy, both in government, compete on a reformist agenda, but pre-election years do not encourage bold moves. .
Meanwhile, Italy must decide whether it replaces Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, who displayed no interest in reform and European affairs, with the cautious Romano Prodi, the former European Commission President. .
Tony Blair, once an ardent pro-European (at least by Britain's undemanding standards), might finally have to cede power to Gordon Brown, who is famously cold to European integration. .
Fortunately, Britain has always been an outsider. .
In the end, whatever light there is, it may not shine until 2007, after the French elections. .
Taming Politicians on Both Sides of the Atlantic.
Despite occasional grumbles from politicians, no one seriously doubts the European Central Bank's independence, or that monetary policy within the euro zone is therefore well insulated from political pressures..
But the recent death of the Stability and Growth Pact-killed off by Germany, its father, with France acting as co-conspirator and willing accomplice-reminds us of a key lesson: elected politicians find it hard, if not impossible, to relinquish substantial power in the area of fiscal policy..
As democracies mature they become ever more practiced at managing opinion, and in many cases, at shaping opinion..
Every time Hans Blix commented on the UN inspections of Iraq that he was conducting, members of the Bush administration would paraphrase what Blix said..
The paraphrasing would subtly change Blix's comments to suit America's case for war..
By repeating the altered comments, it was hoped, mass opinion would shift in favor of the war..
Overthrowing a totalitarian regime and organizing elections may be hard, but the harder task is to go from voting to establishing a true democracy..
For people accustomed to living in a totalitarian state, learn what participation means is not easy..
Hence the popular belief that democracies, like wine, improve with age..
While this may be true, there is a downside to maturity..
Just as citizens in a democracy continuously learn to participate, democratic governments continuously learn how to get their way despite the participation..
It is no use denying that civic participation too often serves only to legitimize a sham..
The same is true across the Atlantic..
We must recognize and confront this problem to prevent established democracies from atrophying and to help new democracies become more effective..
For it is not only morally wrong to leave nations and communities feeling marginalized and without voice; it is a recipe for frustration, rage, and terrorism..
Recasting Governance in Asia.
Governance--the way in which decisions that affect the public interest are made--has emerged as a key factor in determining a country's pace of development..
Successful governance brings purposeful change..
Failure is punished by unrest, disaffection, and stagnation. On April 18.
Today's Asian policymakers confront a very different environment from that faced by their predecessors fifty years ago..
Asia's population has more than doubled since 1950, with most of that growth coming in its poorest countries..
The political systems of these countries were tailored to small, static, rural populations..
Now these societies must cope not only with vast urban centers, but also with the very different talents and demands of urbanized people..
The US Federal Reserve Board is, of course, very independent..
The global economy has changed dramatically, too..
Increased flows of goods, money, and knowledge around the world mean that foreign organizations and individuals become more influential, making it increasingly difficult for national governments manage their countries by themselves..
For example, international bodies such as the WTO have changed the framework within which economic decisions are taken..
Local economic change has been equally dramatic..
In parts of Asia, living standards have skyrocketed..
Foreign investment from within and outside the region has altered the structure of domestic economies..
Old models of economic growth, however, such as export orientation and selective use of import restrictions that worked well for East Asia in the last century, are less feasible under today's global trade rules..
So new rules of the game are needed..
In most Asian countries, formal rules need to be simplified and applied more fairly..
A "back to basics" approach is vital in three inter-linked areas, in which national governments must take the lead: minimizing corruption, enforcing property rights, and consistent application of the rule of law..
But any attempt to limit the fiscal discretion of America's Federal government in the manner of the Stability Pact-for example, the infamous Gramm/Rudman rules of the Clinton era-always collapse in the end in the face of presidential and congressional pressure..
Few countries score strongly here..
Close links between business and governments were blamed by many for the financial crisis that struck Southeast Asia in 1997..
In parts of South Asia, violent conflict and the power of vested interests threaten the rule of law..
The result of such failures is that small elites benefit while the majority suffers..
A clear structure of formal rules is the best antidote to these flaws, for they bolster the informal customs on which so much in society depends..
Most business is not conducted in courts but in meetings where trust and reputation are essential..
As the social theorist Robert Putnam has explained, "social capital"--the networks, norms, and social trust that facilitate cooperation and coordination for mutual benefit--is as much a determinant as it is a result of economic growth..
Empowering as many members citizens as possible is likely to instill a widespread sense of purpose into efforts to move countries forward..
Government, the private sector, and civil society all have a role to play in strengthening social capital..
But successful interactions between these sectors cannot be wished into existence, and it is essential that the role of each is clearly defined..
Monetary policy can be used to stimulate an economy just as much as fiscal policy, if not more, in election years, which politicians will always want to do..
Many Asian governments recognize the need to define their roles more clearly..
Following the 1997 crisis, the state withdrew further from markets, acknowledging the limits to what it can achieve and the importance of allowing private enterprise to flourish..
But governments retain a role in fostering an enabling environment within which markets operate..
Monitoring rules and enforcement are important, but different ways of working--say, through public-private partnerships--are also increasingly being considered in many innovative Asian economies..
The valuable role of civil society in giving voice to communities that governments cannot reach is also recognized, but its relationship with government and business is often characterized more by conflict than cooperation..
The private sector's role in decision-making, too, often needs to be clarified--where businesses have too much influence over government, their need to operate profitable may lead to policies that favor the few over the many..
The metaphor of a game--with rules and participants--leads many to think in terms of a competition between nations..
This is not entirely healthy, as our interdependent world is not a zero-sum game, where one country's gain is another's loss..
Indeed, countries do not compete against each other in the way that firms do..
Trade is potentially a positive-sum game, with all countries benefiting by exploiting their areas of comparative advantage..
But reckless use of either mechanism for short-term goals may create long-term costs, justifying some restrictions on politicians' latitude in influencing macroeconomic policies..
Good governance can enhance this positive-sum game, and ensure that companies and individuals within countries partake of the benefits..
When politicians can control inflation by exercising decisive sway over central banks, they can use their power to devalue the burden of public debt, avoiding the need for more taxation to pay it off..
This was the great lesson of the 1970's and early 1980's, when rampant inflation forced politicians to surrender this power to independent central banks, which alone could convince markets that price stability would be restored..
Yet monetary policy is not a unique species of economic policymaking..
Aspects of fiscal policy could also be delegated to independent bureaucrats in order to keep politicians in line..
Why not, for example, entrust an independent bureaucracy with some redistributive goals or control over the level of public investment or deficit management?.
An independent fiscal authority could arguably implement a society's long-term goals in these areas better than politicians, who have their eyes on the next election..
Indeed, as a matter of principle, it is not clear why monetary policy and fiscal policy should be treated so differently, with one completely delegated to a bureaucratic agency and the other completely discretionary and in the hand of politicians..
So why do we see this large difference in reality in both America and Europe?.
The answer is that fiscal policy is the key tool politicians use to attract and maintain the support of a winning coalition of voters, say retirees, public employees, and middle-class homeowners, while imposing the costs on the losers..
It is not necessary to please 100% of the voters, only enough to win..
The fiscal card is critical in choosing which groups of voters to buy..
Independent fiscal authorities-or fiscal rules such as the Stability Pact-stand in the way of this political use of fiscal policy, which is costly..
After all, if politicians could not win elections by taking money from some-including future generations, which will have to foot a portion of the bill-and giving it to others, they would have to work much harder to display some ability in producing public benefits for all..
This is far more difficult!.
Of course, monetary policy also has redistributive effects..
Think about the different effects of interest rates on debtors versus creditors..
However, monetary policy is a much more awkward, indirect and imprecise way of choosing winners and losers than fiscal policy..
Independent central banks can occasionally be a pain for politicians, but at least they can be used as scapegoats when necessary-a role whose political benefits outweigh the costs of losing control over a useful tool..
These considerations should guide the choice of what will follow the Stability Pact in Europe..
It is now abundantly clear that national governments (especially those of large countries) will never accept substantial limitations on their fiscal discretion..
They may have suspended their freedom of fiscal maneuver long enough to launch the euro, but in normal times, national governments will reclaim their fiscal turf..
So the European Commission should stop fighting a rearguard battle that merely weakens its credibility, especially in the eyes of small countries, which are the only ones that can be bullied into accepting unwanted fiscal rules..
Realistically, all that the Commission can ask of European national governments is for transparency and clarity in their fiscal accounts..
Preventing the political use of fiscal policy is an impossible task..
But at least a country's fiscal actions should not be hidden in its budgets' obscure methodological footnotes..
Even this limited goal may not be easy to achieve..
A strategic lack of transparency is the bread and butter of shrewd politicians who want to please a lobby by hiding the costs of the public's largesse from the majority of citizens..
The rules that govern politicians' behavior must not be written as if disinterested, well-intentioned public servants will apply them..
Politicians are willing to go to great lengths to please their supporters and win elections..
The best that we can plausibly hope for is to ensure that the worst of what they do is done out in the open..
Will the EU Keep Faith with Turkey?.
More than forty years ago, Turkey applied for associate membership of the European Economic Community..
With the Association agreement of 1963, a special relationship was established, culminating in the customs union of 1996..
During all these years, European governments consistently confirmed Turkey's eligibility for full membership, making accession dependent on compliance with membership criteria..
Turkey's formal recognition as a candidate state in 1999 led Turkey to undertake unprecedented reform efforts in the area of human and minority rights, including abolition of the death penalty, safeguards against torture, promotion of religious freedoms, gender equality, and restriction of the military's role in political life..
Should the EU consider the accession criteria as having been fulfilled, it must decide to open negotiations in early 2005..
Not to do so would mean to renege on political commitments and to severely damage the EU's credibility in the world..
In many parts of Europe, however, Turkey's admission to the EU is viewed with skepticism owing to its size, relatively poor economy, fears of massive immigration, and, above all, cultural and societal differences - a euphemism for Islam..
It would be foolish to deny that some of these factors represent serious challenges..
However, they are often exaggerated and certainly not insurmountable..
Negotiations with Turkey would be lengthy and accession may not occur before 2015..
This period of time would offer both Turkey and the Union an opportunity to come to terms..
With 80 million people, Turkey would be one of the largest EU states..
But the size of a country plays only a limited role in the EU's decision-making process, because political influence within the Union depends more on economic power..
Moreover, for decades Turkey has been a responsible member of many European institutions, and there is no reason to believe that it would act differently in the EU..
Because of its weak economy, Turkey would be eligible for substantial EU assistance..
The size of these transfers, however, would depend on the EU's financial policies at the time of admission, the outcome of accession negotiations, and economic developments in Turkey..
In any case, the EU's practice of "capping" its budget would prevent an explosion in the financial costs entailed by Turkey's accession..
Immigration should not be a cause for undue concern, either..
Human mobility is limited, and Turkey workers' would probably be allowed to move freely within the EU only after a long transition period, possibly not before 2025..
Given the expected upswing of Turkey's economy and its declining birthrate, experts predict a figure of around 2.7 million immigrants by that point..
Meanwhile, diminishing and aging populations in most of Europe will have made immigration a necessity..
Among the countries from where immigration to the EU is probable, Turkey has the best prospects for successful adaptation..
It is Turkey's Muslim population that creates the strongest emotions..
Many feel that Turkey simply does not fit into a European society based on Christian traditions and culture..
It is also feared that Islamists may one day turn Turkey into a fundamentalist state..
Unlikely as it may be in view of Turkey's deeply rooted secularism, such a risk cannot be totally excluded..
But the same is true for any other democracy, where radical groups could well misuse the democratic process for their purposes..
Surely, the best protection against such a calamity is to strengthen Turkey's democratic system, which can best be achieved by anchoring it firmly in a bloc of similarly democratic countries..
As for the EU, it must decide whether it wants to be a closed "Christian club" or an open and inclusive society, drawing strength from cultural and religious diversity..
Turkey's accession to the Union would give a powerful answer, one that would be heard with particular clarity in the Islamic world..
The need to refute arguments against Turkey's admission to the EU leaves the advantages rarely mentioned: its unique geopolitical position at the crossroads of the Balkans, Southern Caucasus, Central Asia, and the Middle East - vitally important regions for Europe's security; its role as mayor transit country for energy supplies; its military capabilities at a time when the EU is developing its new European Defense Policy; and the great potential of the Turkish economy, with its young and dynamic labor force..
At the same time, the risks of rejecting Turkey must also be taken into account: the likelihood that the reform process would collapse, bringing radical currents to the fore and leading to instability and political unrest at the EU's doorsteps..
Turkish EU membership presents both opportunities and challenges..
On balance, however, the advantages far outweigh the risks..
Playing at Democracy.
In Calcutta, when some younger kid came along and insisted on joining the game my friends were playing, we would let the new kid in, but only after whispering into each other's ears the words,.
As a child, mastering the cruel art of.
The technique of.
What's true of children and adults is also true of international institutions..
Indeed, organizations that are officially committed to involving all nations in their decision making are often controlled by small groups of powerful nations, while others merely go through the motions of participation..
The World Trade Organization (WTO), supposedly run on the principle of one country one vote, actually has its agenda selected behind the stage by a small group of nations..
It is now standard practice for international organizations publishing a report to involve all the "stakeholders" and to reflect their opinions..
So the evolving report is usually put up on a Web site and suggestions are invited from one and all--NGOs, trade unions, and other organizations of civil society..
This promotes a sense of participation, but as a friend, seasoned in such matters, informed me, the key in the end is to ignore all the comments received and to write up the report as if there were no Web site and no participation..
Increasingly, free expression of opinion does not influence or restrain how government behaves..
Consider the United States..
People expressed their opinion freely--in newspapers, on television, in Internet chat rooms--concerning George Bush's planned war on Iraq..
Never before was there so much opposition to a war.
Part of what happened--or, rather what didn't happen--is admirable: almost no effort was made to muzzle criticism of the government, as happens in China and scores of dictatorial countries..
But the world's great democracies--the US, India, the UK, and others--are increasingly adept at not allowing freely expressed opinions to constrain what the government does..
The current war in Iraq is perhaps the strongest proof of this..
Leaving aside the immorality of this war--and immoral it is--I wish to draw attention to this increasing ability and inclination of democracies to "deal" with (meaning neutralize) public opinion..
They have embraced the.
In Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel is obviously more positive on Europe and more pro-reform than her predecessor, but she is tied up in a grand coalition. .
In France, President Jacques Chirac, the epitome of a leader captured by his lobbies, is staggering impotently toward the end of his term in 2007. .
The two frontrunners to succeed him, Dominique de Villepin and Nicolas Sarkozy, both in government, compete on a reformist agenda, but pre-election years do not encourage bold moves. .
Meanwhile, Italy must decide whether it replaces Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, who displayed no interest in reform and European affairs, with the cautious Romano Prodi, the former European Commission President. .
Tony Blair, once an ardent pro-European (at least by Britain's undemanding standards), might finally have to cede power to Gordon Brown, who is famously cold to European integration. .
Fortunately, Britain has always been an outsider. .
In the end, whatever light there is, it may not shine until 2007, after the French elections. .
Taming Politicians on Both Sides of the Atlantic.
Despite occasional grumbles from politicians, no one seriously doubts the European Central Bank's independence, or that monetary policy within the euro zone is therefore well insulated from political pressures..
But the recent death of the Stability and Growth Pact-killed off by Germany, its father, with France acting as co-conspirator and willing accomplice-reminds us of a key lesson: elected politicians find it hard, if not impossible, to relinquish substantial power in the area of fiscal policy..
As democracies mature they become ever more practiced at managing opinion, and in many cases, at shaping opinion..
Every time Hans Blix commented on the UN inspections of Iraq that he was conducting, members of the Bush administration would paraphrase what Blix said..
The paraphrasing would subtly change Blix's comments to suit America's case for war..
By repeating the altered comments, it was hoped, mass opinion would shift in favor of the war..
Overthrowing a totalitarian regime and organizing elections may be hard, but the harder task is to go from voting to establishing a true democracy..
For people accustomed to living in a totalitarian state, learn what participation means is not easy..
Hence the popular belief that democracies, like wine, improve with age..
While this may be true, there is a downside to maturity..
Just as citizens in a democracy continuously learn to participate, democratic governments continuously learn how to get their way despite the participation..
It is no use denying that civic participation too often serves only to legitimize a sham..
The same is true across the Atlantic..
We must recognize and confront this problem to prevent established democracies from atrophying and to help new democracies become more effective..
For it is not only morally wrong to leave nations and communities feeling marginalized and without voice; it is a recipe for frustration, rage, and terrorism..
Recasting Governance in Asia.
Governance--the way in which decisions that affect the public interest are made--has emerged as a key factor in determining a country's pace of development..
Successful governance brings purposeful change..
Failure is punished by unrest, disaffection, and stagnation. On April 18.
Today's Asian policymakers confront a very different environment from that faced by their predecessors fifty years ago..
Asia's population has more than doubled since 1950, with most of that growth coming in its poorest countries..
The political systems of these countries were tailored to small, static, rural populations..
Now these societies must cope not only with vast urban centers, but also with the very different talents and demands of urbanized people..
The US Federal Reserve Board is, of course, very independent..
The global economy has changed dramatically, too..
Increased flows of goods, money, and knowledge around the world mean that foreign organizations and individuals become more influential, making it increasingly difficult for national governments manage their countries by themselves..
For example, international bodies such as the WTO have changed the framework within which economic decisions are taken..
Local economic change has been equally dramatic..
In parts of Asia, living standards have skyrocketed..
Foreign investment from within and outside the region has altered the structure of domestic economies..
Old models of economic growth, however, such as export orientation and selective use of import restrictions that worked well for East Asia in the last century, are less feasible under today's global trade rules..
So new rules of the game are needed..
In most Asian countries, formal rules need to be simplified and applied more fairly..
A "back to basics" approach is vital in three inter-linked areas, in which national governments must take the lead: minimizing corruption, enforcing property rights, and consistent application of the rule of law..
But any attempt to limit the fiscal discretion of America's Federal government in the manner of the Stability Pact-for example, the infamous Gramm/Rudman rules of the Clinton era-always collapse in the end in the face of presidential and congressional pressure..
Few countries score strongly here..
Close links between business and governments were blamed by many for the financial crisis that struck Southeast Asia in 1997..
In parts of South Asia, violent conflict and the power of vested interests threaten the rule of law..
The result of such failures is that small elites benefit while the majority suffers..
A clear structure of formal rules is the best antidote to these flaws, for they bolster the informal customs on which so much in society depends..
Most business is not conducted in courts but in meetings where trust and reputation are essential..
As the social theorist Robert Putnam has explained, "social capital"--the networks, norms, and social trust that facilitate cooperation and coordination for mutual benefit--is as much a determinant as it is a result of economic growth..
Empowering as many members citizens as possible is likely to instill a widespread sense of purpose into efforts to move countries forward..
Government, the private sector, and civil society all have a role to play in strengthening social capital..
But successful interactions between these sectors cannot be wished into existence, and it is essential that the role of each is clearly defined..
Monetary policy can be used to stimulate an economy just as much as fiscal policy, if not more, in election years, which politicians will always want to do..
Many Asian governments recognize the need to define their roles more clearly..
Following the 1997 crisis, the state withdrew further from markets, acknowledging the limits to what it can achieve and the importance of allowing private enterprise to flourish..
But governments retain a role in fostering an enabling environment within which markets operate..
Monitoring rules and enforcement are important, but different ways of working--say, through public-private partnerships--are also increasingly being considered in many innovative Asian economies..
The valuable role of civil society in giving voice to communities that governments cannot reach is also recognized, but its relationship with government and business is often characterized more by conflict than cooperation..
The private sector's role in decision-making, too, often needs to be clarified--where businesses have too much influence over government, their need to operate profitable may lead to policies that favor the few over the many..
The metaphor of a game--with rules and participants--leads many to think in terms of a competition between nations..
This is not entirely healthy, as our interdependent world is not a zero-sum game, where one country's gain is another's loss..
Indeed, countries do not compete against each other in the way that firms do..
Trade is potentially a positive-sum game, with all countries benefiting by exploiting their areas of comparative advantage..
But reckless use of either mechanism for short-term goals may create long-term costs, justifying some restrictions on politicians' latitude in influencing macroeconomic policies..
Good governance can enhance this positive-sum game, and ensure that companies and individuals within countries partake of the benefits..
When politicians can control inflation by exercising decisive sway over central banks, they can use their power to devalue the burden of public debt, avoiding the need for more taxation to pay it off..
This was the great lesson of the 1970's and early 1980's, when rampant inflation forced politicians to surrender this power to independent central banks, which alone could convince markets that price stability would be restored..
Yet monetary policy is not a unique species of economic policymaking..
Aspects of fiscal policy could also be delegated to independent bureaucrats in order to keep politicians in line..
Why not, for example, entrust an independent bureaucracy with some redistributive goals or control over the level of public investment or deficit management?.
An independent fiscal authority could arguably implement a society's long-term goals in these areas better than politicians, who have their eyes on the next election..
Indeed, as a matter of principle, it is not clear why monetary policy and fiscal policy should be treated so differently, with one completely delegated to a bureaucratic agency and the other completely discretionary and in the hand of politicians..
So why do we see this large difference in reality in both America and Europe?.
The answer is that fiscal policy is the key tool politicians use to attract and maintain the support of a winning coalition of voters, say retirees, public employees, and middle-class homeowners, while imposing the costs on the losers..
It is not necessary to please 100% of the voters, only enough to win..
The fiscal card is critical in choosing which groups of voters to buy..
Independent fiscal authorities-or fiscal rules such as the Stability Pact-stand in the way of this political use of fiscal policy, which is costly..
After all, if politicians could not win elections by taking money from some-including future generations, which will have to foot a portion of the bill-and giving it to others, they would have to work much harder to display some ability in producing public benefits for all..
This is far more difficult!.
Of course, monetary policy also has redistributive effects..
Think about the different effects of interest rates on debtors versus creditors..
However, monetary policy is a much more awkward, indirect and imprecise way of choosing winners and losers than fiscal policy..
Independent central banks can occasionally be a pain for politicians, but at least they can be used as scapegoats when necessary-a role whose political benefits outweigh the costs of losing control over a useful tool..
These considerations should guide the choice of what will follow the Stability Pact in Europe..
It is now abundantly clear that national governments (especially those of large countries) will never accept substantial limitations on their fiscal discretion..
They may have suspended their freedom of fiscal maneuver long enough to launch the euro, but in normal times, national governments will reclaim their fiscal turf..
So the European Commission should stop fighting a rearguard battle that merely weakens its credibility, especially in the eyes of small countries, which are the only ones that can be bullied into accepting unwanted fiscal rules..
Realistically, all that the Commission can ask of European national governments is for transparency and clarity in their fiscal accounts..
Preventing the political use of fiscal policy is an impossible task..
But at least a country's fiscal actions should not be hidden in its budgets' obscure methodological footnotes..
Even this limited goal may not be easy to achieve..
A strategic lack of transparency is the bread and butter of shrewd politicians who want to please a lobby by hiding the costs of the public's largesse from the majority of citizens..
The rules that govern politicians' behavior must not be written as if disinterested, well-intentioned public servants will apply them..
Politicians are willing to go to great lengths to please their supporters and win elections..
The best that we can plausibly hope for is to ensure that the worst of what they do is done out in the open..
Will the EU Keep Faith with Turkey?.
More than forty years ago, Turkey applied for associate membership of the European Economic Community..
With the Association agreement of 1963, a special relationship was established, culminating in the customs union of 1996..
During all these years, European governments consistently confirmed Turkey's eligibility for full membership, making accession dependent on compliance with membership criteria..
Turkey's formal recognition as a candidate state in 1999 led Turkey to undertake unprecedented reform efforts in the area of human and minority rights, including abolition of the death penalty, safeguards against torture, promotion of religious freedoms, gender equality, and restriction of the military's role in political life..
Should the EU consider the accession criteria as having been fulfilled, it must decide to open negotiations in early 2005..
Not to do so would mean to renege on political commitments and to severely damage the EU's credibility in the world..
In many parts of Europe, however, Turkey's admission to the EU is viewed with skepticism owing to its size, relatively poor economy, fears of massive immigration, and, above all, cultural and societal differences - a euphemism for Islam..
It would be foolish to deny that some of these factors represent serious challenges..
However, they are often exaggerated and certainly not insurmountable..
Negotiations with Turkey would be lengthy and accession may not occur before 2015..
This period of time would offer both Turkey and the Union an opportunity to come to terms..
With 80 million people, Turkey would be one of the largest EU states..
But the size of a country plays only a limited role in the EU's decision-making process, because political influence within the Union depends more on economic power..
Moreover, for decades Turkey has been a responsible member of many European institutions, and there is no reason to believe that it would act differently in the EU..
Because of its weak economy, Turkey would be eligible for substantial EU assistance..
The size of these transfers, however, would depend on the EU's financial policies at the time of admission, the outcome of accession negotiations, and economic developments in Turkey..
In any case, the EU's practice of "capping" its budget would prevent an explosion in the financial costs entailed by Turkey's accession..
Immigration should not be a cause for undue concern, either..
Human mobility is limited, and Turkey workers' would probably be allowed to move freely within the EU only after a long transition period, possibly not before 2025..
Given the expected upswing of Turkey's economy and its declining birthrate, experts predict a figure of around 2.7 million immigrants by that point..
Meanwhile, diminishing and aging populations in most of Europe will have made immigration a necessity..
Among the countries from where immigration to the EU is probable, Turkey has the best prospects for successful adaptation..
It is Turkey's Muslim population that creates the strongest emotions..
Many feel that Turkey simply does not fit into a European society based on Christian traditions and culture..
It is also feared that Islamists may one day turn Turkey into a fundamentalist state..
Unlikely as it may be in view of Turkey's deeply rooted secularism, such a risk cannot be totally excluded..
But the same is true for any other democracy, where radical groups could well misuse the democratic process for their purposes..
Surely, the best protection against such a calamity is to strengthen Turkey's democratic system, which can best be achieved by anchoring it firmly in a bloc of similarly democratic countries..
As for the EU, it must decide whether it wants to be a closed "Christian club" or an open and inclusive society, drawing strength from cultural and religious diversity..
Turkey's accession to the Union would give a powerful answer, one that would be heard with particular clarity in the Islamic world..
The need to refute arguments against Turkey's admission to the EU leaves the advantages rarely mentioned: its unique geopolitical position at the crossroads of the Balkans, Southern Caucasus, Central Asia, and the Middle East - vitally important regions for Europe's security; its role as mayor transit country for energy supplies; its military capabilities at a time when the EU is developing its new European Defense Policy; and the great potential of the Turkish economy, with its young and dynamic labor force..
At the same time, the risks of rejecting Turkey must also be taken into account: the likelihood that the reform process would collapse, bringing radical currents to the fore and leading to instability and political unrest at the EU's doorsteps..
Turkish EU membership presents both opportunities and challenges..
On balance, however, the advantages far outweigh the risks..
Playing at Democracy.
In Calcutta, when some younger kid came along and insisted on joining the game my friends were playing, we would let the new kid in, but only after whispering into each other's ears the words,.
As a child, mastering the cruel art of.
The technique of.
What's true of children and adults is also true of international institutions..
Indeed, organizations that are officially committed to involving all nations in their decision making are often controlled by small groups of powerful nations, while others merely go through the motions of participation..
The World Trade Organization (WTO), supposedly run on the principle of one country one vote, actually has its agenda selected behind the stage by a small group of nations..
It is now standard practice for international organizations publishing a report to involve all the "stakeholders" and to reflect their opinions..
So the evolving report is usually put up on a Web site and suggestions are invited from one and all--NGOs, trade unions, and other organizations of civil society..
This promotes a sense of participation, but as a friend, seasoned in such matters, informed me, the key in the end is to ignore all the comments received and to write up the report as if there were no Web site and no participation..
Increasingly, free expression of opinion does not influence or restrain how government behaves..
Consider the United States..
People expressed their opinion freely--in newspapers, on television, in Internet chat rooms--concerning George Bush's planned war on Iraq..
Never before was there so much opposition to a war.
Part of what happened--or, rather what didn't happen--is admirable: almost no effort was made to muzzle criticism of the government, as happens in China and scores of dictatorial countries..
But the world's great democracies--the US, India, the UK, and others--are increasingly adept at not allowing freely expressed opinions to constrain what the government does..
The current war in Iraq is perhaps the strongest proof of this..
Leaving aside the immorality of this war--and immoral it is--I wish to draw attention to this increasing ability and inclination of democracies to "deal" with (meaning neutralize) public opinion..
They have embraced the.
In Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel is obviously more positive on Europe and more pro-reform than her predecessor, but she is tied up in a grand coalition. .
In France, President Jacques Chirac, the epitome of a leader captured by his lobbies, is staggering impotently toward the end of his term in 2007. .
The two frontrunners to succeed him, Dominique de Villepin and Nicolas Sarkozy, both in government, compete on a reformist agenda, but pre-election years do not encourage bold moves. .
Meanwhile, Italy must decide whether it replaces Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, who displayed no interest in reform and European affairs, with the cautious Romano Prodi, the former European Commission President. .
Tony Blair, once an ardent pro-European (at least by Britain's undemanding standards), might finally have to cede power to Gordon Brown, who is famously cold to European integration. .
Fortunately, Britain has always been an outsider. .
In the end, whatever light there is, it may not shine until 2007, after the French elections. .
Taming Politicians on Both Sides of the Atlantic.
Despite occasional grumbles from politicians, no one seriously doubts the European Central Bank's independence, or that monetary policy within the euro zone is therefore well insulated from political pressures..
But the recent death of the Stability and Growth Pact-killed off by Germany, its father, with France acting as co-conspirator and willing accomplice-reminds us of a key lesson: elected politicians find it hard, if not impossible, to relinquish substantial power in the area of fiscal policy..
As democracies mature they become ever more practiced at managing opinion, and in many cases, at shaping opinion..
Every time Hans Blix commented on the UN inspections of Iraq that he was conducting, members of the Bush administration would paraphrase what Blix said..
The paraphrasing would subtly change Blix's comments to suit America's case for war..
By repeating the altered comments, it was hoped, mass opinion would shift in favor of the war..
Overthrowing a totalitarian regime and organizing elections may be hard, but the harder task is to go from voting to establishing a true democracy..
For people accustomed to living in a totalitarian state, learn what participation means is not easy..
Hence the popular belief that democracies, like wine, improve with age..
While this may be true, there is a downside to maturity..
Just as citizens in a democracy continuously learn to participate, democratic governments continuously learn how to get their way despite the participation..
It is no use denying that civic participation too often serves only to legitimize a sham..
The same is true across the Atlantic..
We must recognize and confront this problem to prevent established democracies from atrophying and to help new democracies become more effective..
For it is not only morally wrong to leave nations and communities feeling marginalized and without voice; it is a recipe for frustration, rage, and terrorism..
Recasting Governance in Asia.
Governance--the way in which decisions that affect the public interest are made--has emerged as a key factor in determining a country's pace of development..
Successful governance brings purposeful change..
Failure is punished by unrest, disaffection, and stagnation. On April 18.
Today's Asian policymakers confront a very different environment from that faced by their predecessors fifty years ago..
Asia's population has more than doubled since 1950, with most of that growth coming in its poorest countries..
The political systems of these countries were tailored to small, static, rural populations..
Now these societies must cope not only with vast urban centers, but also with the very different talents and demands of urbanized people..
The US Federal Reserve Board is, of course, very independent..
The global economy has changed dramatically, too..
Increased flows of goods, money, and knowledge around the world mean that foreign organizations and individuals become more influential, making it increasingly difficult for national governments manage their countries by themselves..
For example, international bodies such as the WTO have changed the framework within which economic decisions are taken..
Local economic change has been equally dramatic..
In parts of Asia, living standards have skyrocketed..
Foreign investment from within and outside the region has altered the structure of domestic economies..
Old models of economic growth, however, such as export orientation and selective use of import restrictions that worked well for East Asia in the last century, are less feasible under today's global trade rules..
So new rules of the game are needed..
In most Asian countries, formal rules need to be simplified and applied more fairly..
A "back to basics" approach is vital in three inter-linked areas, in which national governments must take the lead: minimizing corruption, enforcing property rights, and consistent application of the rule of law..
But any attempt to limit the fiscal discretion of America's Federal government in the manner of the Stability Pact-for example, the infamous Gramm/Rudman rules of the Clinton era-always collapse in the end in the face of presidential and congressional pressure..
Few countries score strongly here..
Close links between business and governments were blamed by many for the financial crisis that struck Southeast Asia in 1997..
In parts of South Asia, violent conflict and the power of vested interests threaten the rule of law..
The result of such failures is that small elites benefit while the majority suffers..
A clear structure of formal rules is the best antidote to these flaws, for they bolster the informal customs on which so much in society depends..
Most business is not conducted in courts but in meetings where trust and reputation are essential..
As the social theorist Robert Putnam has explained, "social capital"--the networks, norms, and social trust that facilitate cooperation and coordination for mutual benefit--is as much a determinant as it is a result of economic growth..
Empowering as many members citizens as possible is likely to instill a widespread sense of purpose into efforts to move countries forward..
Government, the private sector, and civil society all have a role to play in strengthening social capital..
But successful interactions between these sectors cannot be wished into existence, and it is essential that the role of each is clearly defined..
Monetary policy can be used to stimulate an economy just as much as fiscal policy, if not more, in election years, which politicians will always want to do..
Many Asian governments recognize the need to define their roles more clearly..
Following the 1997 crisis, the state withdrew further from markets, acknowledging the limits to what it can achieve and the importance of allowing private enterprise to flourish..
But governments retain a role in fostering an enabling environment within which markets operate..
Monitoring rules and enforcement are important, but different ways of working--say, through public-private partnerships--are also increasingly being considered in many innovative Asian economies..
The valuable role of civil society in giving voice to communities that governments cannot reach is also recognized, but its relationship with government and business is often characterized more by conflict than cooperation..
The private sector's role in decision-making, too, often needs to be clarified--where businesses have too much influence over government, their need to operate profitable may lead to policies that favor the few over the many..
The metaphor of a game--with rules and participants--leads many to think in terms of a competition between nations..
This is not entirely healthy, as our interdependent world is not a zero-sum game, where one country's gain is another's loss..
Indeed, countries do not compete against each other in the way that firms do..
Trade is potentially a positive-sum game, with all countries benefiting by exploiting their areas of comparative advantage..
But reckless use of either mechanism for short-term goals may create long-term costs, justifying some restrictions on politicians' latitude in influencing macroeconomic policies..
Good governance can enhance this positive-sum game, and ensure that companies and individuals within countries partake of the benefits..
When politicians can control inflation by exercising decisive sway over central banks, they can use their power to devalue the burden of public debt, avoiding the need for more taxation to pay it off..
This was the great lesson of the 1970's and early 1980's, when rampant inflation forced politicians to surrender this power to independent central banks, which alone could convince markets that price stability would be restored..
Yet monetary policy is not a unique species of economic policymaking..
Aspects of fiscal policy could also be delegated to independent bureaucrats in order to keep politicians in line..
Why not, for example, entrust an independent bureaucracy with some redistributive goals or control over the level of public investment or deficit management?.
An independent fiscal authority could arguably implement a society's long-term goals in these areas better than politicians, who have their eyes on the next election..
Indeed, as a matter of principle, it is not clear why monetary policy and fiscal policy should be treated so differently, with one completely delegated to a bureaucratic agency and the other completely discretionary and in the hand of politicians..
So why do we see this large difference in reality in both America and Europe?.
The answer is that fiscal policy is the key tool politicians use to attract and maintain the support of a winning coalition of voters, say retirees, public employees, and middle-class homeowners, while imposing the costs on the losers..
It is not necessary to please 100% of the voters, only enough to win..
The fiscal card is critical in choosing which groups of voters to buy..
Independent fiscal authorities-or fiscal rules such as the Stability Pact-stand in the way of this political use of fiscal policy, which is costly..
After all, if politicians could not win elections by taking money from some-including future generations, which will have to foot a portion of the bill-and giving it to others, they would have to work much harder to display some ability in producing public benefits for all..
This is far more difficult!.
Of course, monetary policy also has redistributive effects..
Think about the different effects of interest rates on debtors versus creditors..
However, monetary policy is a much more awkward, indirect and imprecise way of choosing winners and losers than fiscal policy..
Independent central banks can occasionally be a pain for politicians, but at least they can be used as scapegoats when necessary-a role whose political benefits outweigh the costs of losing control over a useful tool..
These considerations should guide the choice of what will follow the Stability Pact in Europe..
It is now abundantly clear that national governments (especially those of large countries) will never accept substantial limitations on their fiscal discretion..
They may have suspended their freedom of fiscal maneuver long enough to launch the euro, but in normal times, national governments will reclaim their fiscal turf..
So the European Commission should stop fighting a rearguard battle that merely weakens its credibility, especially in the eyes of small countries, which are the only ones that can be bullied into accepting unwanted fiscal rules..
Realistically, all that the Commission can ask of European national governments is for transparency and clarity in their fiscal accounts..
Preventing the political use of fiscal policy is an impossible task..
But at least a country's fiscal actions should not be hidden in its budgets' obscure methodological footnotes..
Even this limited goal may not be easy to achieve..
A strategic lack of transparency is the bread and butter of shrewd politicians who want to please a lobby by hiding the costs of the public's largesse from the majority of citizens..
The rules that govern politicians' behavior must not be written as if disinterested, well-intentioned public servants will apply them..
Politicians are willing to go to great lengths to please their supporters and win elections..
The best that we can plausibly hope for is to ensure that the worst of what they do is done out in the open..
Will the EU Keep Faith with Turkey?.
More than forty years ago, Turkey applied for associate membership of the European Economic Community..
With the Association agreement of 1963, a special relationship was established, culminating in the customs union of 1996..
During all these years, European governments consistently confirmed Turkey's eligibility for full membership, making accession dependent on compliance with membership criteria..
Turkey's formal recognition as a candidate state in 1999 led Turkey to undertake unprecedented reform efforts in the area of human and minority rights, including abolition of the death penalty, safeguards against torture, promotion of religious freedoms, gender equality, and restriction of the military's role in political life..
Should the EU consider the accession criteria as having been fulfilled, it must decide to open negotiations in early 2005..
Not to do so would mean to renege on political commitments and to severely damage the EU's credibility in the world..
In many parts of Europe, however, Turkey's admission to the EU is viewed with skepticism owing to its size, relatively poor economy, fears of massive immigration, and, above all, cultural and societal differences - a euphemism for Islam..
It would be foolish to deny that some of these factors represent serious challenges..
However, they are often exaggerated and certainly not insurmountable..
Negotiations with Turkey would be lengthy and accession may not occur before 2015..
This period of time would offer both Turkey and the Union an opportunity to come to terms..
With 80 million people, Turkey would be one of the largest EU states..
But the size of a country plays only a limited role in the EU's decision-making process, because political influence within the Union depends more on economic power..
Moreover, for decades Turkey has been a responsible member of many European institutions, and there is no reason to believe that it would act differently in the EU..
Because of its weak economy, Turkey would be eligible for substantial EU assistance..
The size of these transfers, however, would depend on the EU's financial policies at the time of admission, the outcome of accession negotiations, and economic developments in Turkey..
In any case, the EU's practice of "capping" its budget would prevent an explosion in the financial costs entailed by Turkey's accession..
Immigration should not be a cause for undue concern, either..
Human mobility is limited, and Turkey workers' would probably be allowed to move freely within the EU only after a long transition period, possibly not before 2025..
Given the expected upswing of Turkey's economy and its declining birthrate, experts predict a figure of around 2.7 million immigrants by that point..
Meanwhile, diminishing and aging populations in most of Europe will have made immigration a necessity..
Among the countries from where immigration to the EU is probable, Turkey has the best prospects for successful adaptation..
It is Turkey's Muslim population that creates the strongest emotions..
Many feel that Turkey simply does not fit into a European society based on Christian traditions and culture..
It is also feared that Islamists may one day turn Turkey into a fundamentalist state..
Unlikely as it may be in view of Turkey's deeply rooted secularism, such a risk cannot be totally excluded..
But the same is true for any other democracy, where radical groups could well misuse the democratic process for their purposes..
Surely, the best protection against such a calamity is to strengthen Turkey's democratic system, which can best be achieved by anchoring it firmly in a bloc of similarly democratic countries..
As for the EU, it must decide whether it wants to be a closed "Christian club" or an open and inclusive society, drawing strength from cultural and religious diversity..
Turkey's accession to the Union would give a powerful answer, one that would be heard with particular clarity in the Islamic world..
The need to refute arguments against Turkey's admission to the EU leaves the advantages rarely mentioned: its unique geopolitical position at the crossroads of the Balkans, Southern Caucasus, Central Asia, and the Middle East - vitally important regions for Europe's security; its role as mayor transit country for energy supplies; its military capabilities at a time when the EU is developing its new European Defense Policy; and the great potential of the Turkish economy, with its young and dynamic labor force..
At the same time, the risks of rejecting Turkey must also be taken into account: the likelihood that the reform process would collapse, bringing radical currents to the fore and leading to instability and political unrest at the EU's doorsteps..
Turkish EU membership presents both opportunities and challenges..
On balance, however, the advantages far outweigh the risks..
Playing at Democracy.
In Calcutta, when some younger kid came along and insisted on joining the game my friends were playing, we would let the new kid in, but only after whispering into each other's ears the words,.
As a child, mastering the cruel art of.
The technique of.
What's true of children and adults is also true of international institutions..
Indeed, organizations that are officially committed to involving all nations in their decision making are often controlled by small groups of powerful nations, while others merely go through the motions of participation..
The World Trade Organization (WTO), supposedly run on the principle of one country one vote, actually has its agenda selected behind the stage by a small group of nations..
It is now standard practice for international organizations publishing a report to involve all the "stakeholders" and to reflect their opinions..
So the evolving report is usually put up on a Web site and suggestions are invited from one and all--NGOs, trade unions, and other organizations of civil society..
This promotes a sense of participation, but as a friend, seasoned in such matters, informed me, the key in the end is to ignore all the comments received and to write up the report as if there were no Web site and no participation..
Increasingly, free expression of opinion does not influence or restrain how government behaves..
Consider the United States..
People expressed their opinion freely--in newspapers, on television, in Internet chat rooms--concerning George Bush's planned war on Iraq..
Never before was there so much opposition to a war.
Part of what happened--or, rather what didn't happen--is admirable: almost no effort was made to muzzle criticism of the government, as happens in China and scores of dictatorial countries..
But the world's great democracies--the US, India, the UK, and others--are increasingly adept at not allowing freely expressed opinions to constrain what the government does..
The current war in Iraq is perhaps the strongest proof of this..
Leaving aside the immorality of this war--and immoral it is--I wish to draw attention to this increasing ability and inclination of democracies to "deal" with (meaning neutralize) public opinion..
They have embraced the.
In another sense, however, it is valuable to think of governments as being in competition--providing a more effective service to their people than other governments..
International comparison of systems therefore plays an important role..
In this spirit, this month's UNCTAD-UNDP conference--"Governance in Asia: Underpinning Competitiveness in a Global Economy"--will bring together policy-makers from across Asia to discuss the governance challenges that Asia faces..
The role of government--the only actor possessing the legitimacy of a popular mandate--is fundamentally important in steering a society forward..
The private sector and civil society are, of course, increasingly important partners for governments..
How relationships among these stakeholders function will powerfully influence Asia's future development..
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Replacing a governor whom they re-elected only a year before with Arnold Schwarzenegger must have given Californian voters an enormous--if guilty--pleasure..
Some members of the opposition in Germany would dearly love to do the same to Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, though they have not (yet!.
) found a film star to replace him..
But if those who built the post-World War II international monetary system worked to guard against the dangers posed by panic-driven international financial crises, why are these financial devils back?.
The truth is that economic policymakers are juggling sets of potential disasters, exchanging the one that appears most threatening for a threat that seems more distant..
In the US, the Bush Administration is skeptical of the stimulative power of monetary policy and wants bigger fiscal deficits to reduce unemployment, hoping that the future dangers posed by persistent deficits -- low investment, slow growth, loss of confidence, uncontrolled inflation and exchange rate depreciation-- can be finessed, or will not become visible until after the Bush team leaves office..
In Europe, the European Central Bank believes that the danger of uncontrolled inflation following a loss of public confidence in its commitment to low inflation outweighs the costs of European employment that is far too high..
In developing countries, capital controls to prevent financial crises are feared as obstacles to attracting the finance necessary for industrialization, and as potential sources of corruption as financial flows somehow pass through the hands of the Vice Minister of Finance's nephew-in-law..
Flexible exchange rates, designed to allow the market to signal when confidence in the currency is declining, also put exporters at a competitive disadvantage against foreign-country producers whose prices aren't batted around by unpredictable exchange rates..
Even the import-substitution policies, now universally scorned, were originally adopted by the developing world for good (as well as bad) reasons: the protectionist shutting-off of developed-country markets during the Great Depression which had disastrous consequences for the developing economies..
The ghosts of economics' past return because the lessons of the present are always oversold..
Politicians and policymakers advance their approach to economics as the "One True Doctrine.".
But what they are doing, however, is dealing with the biggest problem of the moment but at the price of removing institutions and policies that policymakers before them had put into place to control problems which they felt to be the most pressing..
Several other European governments find themselves in a similar state of unpopularity not long after being elected..
Ebeneezer Scrooge's nocturnal visitors were able to convince him of the errors of his ways..
Let's hope that today's economists also learn the lessons of their unwanted ghosts..
In the D-Mark's Shadow.
Getting Over the Irish Stew.
Justifying Humanitarian Intervention.
In 1998, I visited Central Asia's former Soviet republics for talks--concerning the democratic development that was--or should have been--taking place in those newly independent countries..
My hosts were former communist leaders who were now more or less democratically elected presidents..
Each spoke easily about institutions, democratic procedures, and respect for the rule of law..
But human rights were another matter entirely..
In each country, I presented lists of political prisoners and asked about their fates..
Beyond Europe this is true even for the recently acclaimed Brazilian President Luis Inacio "Lula" da Silva, to say nothing of Mexican President Vicente Fox and South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun, the latter having called for a referendum to help arrest his sinking popularity..
In one country, the president immediately decided to free a man accused of plotting a coup..
But even this seeming success was morally ambiguous..
The president had not made a political decision; he had bestowed a personal favor..
I was receiving a gift--itself merely another demonstration of the president's arbitrary exercise of power--not proof of respect for moral principles..
In one country, I spoke with a leader of the Islamic fundamentalist opposition, which had waged a long civil war against the government..
This man now styled himself as chairman of a "Committee of National Reconciliation.".
Guards armed to the teeth surrounded him, yet he firmly supported the notion of democratization..
Indeed, he saw it as his surest route to power, because the vast majority of the population thought exactly as he did..
Democracy, he hinted more ominously, would enable him to "eliminate"--he did not dwell on the exact meaning of the word--those who did not..
In such democracies without democrats, "human rights" are more problematic to discuss than procedural formalities, because they are not thought of as "rights" in the legal sense, but merely as pangs of conscience, or else as gifts to be exchanged for something else of value..
Electoral success, it appears, fades fast nowadays..
This distinction matters because it points to the limited effectiveness of formalized legal norms as a means of promoting human rights..
This gap between human rights and the behavior of rulers has brought about the greatest shift in the conduct of international affairs in our time--the advent of "humanitarian intervention.".
It arose initially outside established international institutions and the UN system, originating with the French group, Doctors Without Borders, which deemed human rights to be a value superior to national sovereignty..
Doctors Without Borders introduced the concept of "the right of intervention" in humanitarian disasters, bypassing the strictures of traditional international law..
The international system rather quickly adopted (and transformed) this notion, and numerous humanitarian.
NATO's intervention in Kosovo is a precedent that US Secretary of State Colin Powell used to justify the war with Iraq..
But, however compelling the cause of humanitarian military intervention, such actions must be brought under the umbrella of the UN Charter..
Promoting respect for human rights was, after all, the guiding principle behind the UN's establishment..
Its tasks in this area were affirmed in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the 1975 Helsinki Accords, which give human rights legal supremacy over the sovereignty of individual states..
Yet a glaring contradiction exists between the universality and supremacy of human rights and the principles of sovereignty and non-interference in states' internal affairs, which are also enshrined in UN documents..
So should every country adopt a recall procedure to maintain the legitimacy of governments?.
One way to overcome this chasm is to introduce into the UN Charter a new chapter devoted to human rights and to reformulate Chapter IV, which concerns the use of force in international relations..
Moreover, the principle of sovereignty itself needs redefinition..
What the world needs is a system of legal injunctions--bilateral and multilateral agreements, as well as appropriate monitoring and supervisory institutions--to regulate the use of force for humanitarian reasons..
Legal restraints on humanitarian intervention are necessary because dictators too often use it to justify criminal aggression..
Adolf Hitler minted this strategy when he dismantled Czechoslovakia--supposedly in defense of the Sudeten Germans--and later when he invaded my homeland, Poland..
As Milosevic showed again in the 1990s, when he claimed to be defending innocent Serbs in Croatia and Bosnia, justifying military intervention solely on the basis of moral principles leaves too much room for their distortion and abuse..
This is why debates about reforming the Security Council should focus not on changing its composition, but on its mission..
The Council should be made explicitly responsible for "human security" and be given a responsibility to protect it, in addition to its current role in safeguarding more traditional notions of international security..
The principle of non-intervention in a state's internal affairs was never absolute, and globalization confronts it with a radical challenge..
The term "international relations" assumes the Westphalian order of commitments among sovereign nation states, which replaced the medieval order of communities defined by personal fealty to a king..
Absolutely not..
But today it is the Westphalian order that is in decline, along with the significance of state borders..
Democracy, in the words of the philosopher Karl Popper, is about being able to remove those in power without violence; it is in this sense about trial and error..
But leaders must be given the chance to govern..
Indeed, they need a chance to make mistakes and to learn and recover from their errors, as long as their decisions do not affect the foundations of the democratic order itself..
Trial and error implies the opportunity to err before we try again..
Californian voters' first mistake is thus what may be called "the lure of the immediate"--none too surprising in a state where instant gratification is supposedly a core value..
But sometimes this desire seems overwhelming in post-modern democracies everywhere..
Indeed, democracy nowadays has embraced a pop culture of rapidly passing fads; today's hysteria-generating pop group is forgotten tomorrow, and there are always more waiting in the wings..
In politics this can be dangerous, because it encourages basing decisions, no matter how weighty, on whatever popular opinion momentarily prevails..
The call for more referenda both reflects and fuels this trend..
Referenda are for the most part snapshots..
Switzerland, with its generally slower pace and its thorough political debates before votes are held, may be the exception..
As a rule however, referenda measure the popularity of political leaders at a particular moment, regardless of the issue at stake..
If and when Britain votes on joining the Euro, the result will most likely tell us all sorts of things about Tony Blair and about the European Union, but little about the merits of the common currency..
So the case for representative government remains strong..
Democracy is government by debate, by taking important decisions after thorough deliberation of the kind that--at least in large countries--must be conducted in a parliament through elected representatives..
Sometimes parliaments wish to act quickly, and perhaps must do so, but as a rule they take enough time to examine issues fully..
Parliaments talk before reaching conclusions; hence their name..
Consider Germany, where some leaders of the opposition Christian Democrats yearn to sink the Schröder government..
Clearly, the reforms proposed and already partly enacted by the government are unpopular, and there is little doubt that, a year after their re-election, the coalition of the Social Democrats and the Greens would not stand much of a chance at the polls..
But who knows what the electorate will think in three years, at the end of the government's full term in office?.
By the time of the next regularly scheduled election, it could become clear that there were no real alternatives to Schröder's policies, and it could even be the case that the predicted beneficial effects of painful reforms will become apparent by then..
Leadership needs time to take and implement unpopular decisions as well as popular ones..
Leaders themselves need the nerve to take often precarious parliamentary majorities through the troughs of popularity..
This is why they should commit their cruelest deeds in the first year and soften up as the next election approaches..
The uneasy partnership of Prime Minister Tony Blair and Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown is a good example of this tactic..
Leaders who never risk their popularity are not worth their position..
So California has set a bad example, and Californians will probably pay a heavy price for it..
They may not pay as heavy a price as France a century and a half ago, when the popularly elected Louis Napoleon transformed himself, via a wildly popular referendum, into Napoleon III--that vote being the last the French would enjoy until the end of the Second Empire..
Californians, of course, won't be disenfranchised, but their willfulness threatens to yield a wayward and irresponsible form of state politics..
To be sure, democracy implies limiting the time that the powerful have to exercise their power without challenge..
An effective democracy must give them enough time to win the support of those elected to legislate and to carry out their program..
These two imperatives are inherently contradictory, but the balance between them is still best achieved through representative, parliamentary democracy..
Anything else is likely to be about as stable as this week's top ten pop songs..
Herbert Hoover and the Stability Pact.
In mid-July the great-and-good finance ministers of the European Monetary Union (EMU) gathered to consider the euro zone's economic condition..
They ruminated over the most recent economic forecast, which projects annual GDP growth in the euro zone this year at a pathetically anemic 0.7%..
Then, to a minister, without exception, they all but decided that their economies should suffer more of the same, if not worse..
They reiterated their commitment to the Stability and Growth Pact, which requires euro-zone countries to raise taxes and cut spending, putting even more downward pressure on their economies..
The Pact is already knocking Germany into recession, and Italy's government is struggling to revise its growth forecasts fast enough to keep up with falling output..
But none of this is apparently enough to force officials to re-examine their priorities..
Some EU finance ministers still view the Stability Pact as the ``cornerstone'' of EMU..
Others talk of the importance of obeying the ``rules of the game.''.
Still others say that while it is clearly essential to restore economic growth, the recovery must occur ``within the spirit of the Pact.''.
From the American side of the Atlantic, all of these rationales seem utterly bizarre..
The last time an American government tried to ensure a balanced budget in the face of a recession was over seventy years ago, during the presidency of Herbert Hoover at the outset of the Great Depression..
Since then the broad consensus in the US has been that cyclical economic distress requires the use of budget deficits to ameliorate suffering, stimulate aggregate demand, and hasten recovery..
Economists call these cyclical fiscal boosts ``automatic stabilizers.''.
When private incomes fall, so do public revenues..
The reduction in tax collection can increase disposable income..
But, more importantly, when private incomes fall, government social-welfare expenditures rise, sparking a recovery in demand, output, investment, and employment..
The fall in taxes and the rise in spending do widen the budget deficit, but in a healthy and useful way..
On the American side of the Atlantic, the usefulness of these automatic fiscal stabilizers is unchallenged..
On the contrary, whenever recession threatens, political debate revolves around whether they need to be reinforced by.
Nor is it even a fiscal discipline issue..
Whenever proposals have surfaced for some sort of balanced-budget amendment to the US Constitution, proponents have typically included exemptions not just for war, but also for recessions..
We know the origins of the Stability and Growth Pact..
Northern European countries--particularly Germany and the Netherlands--prided themselves on traditionally maintaining moderate debt-to-GDP ratios and relatively low interest rates..
These countries saw that Southern European countries--Italy and Greece were the biggest worries--traditionally had high debt-to-GDP ratios and relatively high nominal interest rates because of their perceived tolerance of inflation..
The Northern European countries feared that deficit spending by the South might ultimately create pressure for partial monetization of their debt through inflation of the euro--or, more precisely, their leaders feared that investors, fearing the same thing, would demand higher interest rates..
The Stability and Growth Pact was intended to keep the public debts of southern Europe low, and thus keep interest rates low by reassuring investors that national debts would never be allowed to rise high enough to generate serious inflationary pressures..
But if you look at the euro zone's economic problems today, the danger of high long-term nominal interest rates does not even rank among investors' top ten concerns..
At the very least, investors clearly do not fear that high debt will lead governments to stoke inflation by printing more money..
The EU's problems are stagnant output, high structural unemployment, weak productivity growth, the wasteful and unfair Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), and the forthcoming structural adjustments from the expansion of the EU itself..
From one perspective, it is good that the euro zone's finance ministers are eager to keep their national debts low in the long term: it is a sign that the victories over inflation won in the 1970's will not be casually thrown away..
But it is dangerous to become obsessed with the past..
There is no more certain route to economic disaster than to put on historical blinders..
As Herbert Hoover could attest, when we see only the economic policy problems of a generation ago, we risk missing the hazards that lie directly in front of our eyes..
The Ghosts of Economics Past.
In Charles Dicken's great novel "A Christmas Carol," the soulless businessman Ebeneezer Scrooge is tormented by a visit from the Spirit of Christmas Past..
Today, economists are similarly troubled by unwanted ghosts, as they ponder the reappearance of economic ills long thought buried and dead..
From Stephen Roach at Morgan Stanley to Paul Krugman at Princeton, to the Governors of the US Federal Reserve and the senior staff at the European Central Bank, to almost everyone in Japan, economists all over the world are worrying about deflation..
Their thoughts retrace the economic thinking of over fifty years ago, a time when economists concluded that the thing to do with deflation was to avoid it like the plague..
Back in 1933 Irving Fisher --Milton Friedman's predecessor atop America's monetarist school of economists-- announced that governments could prevent deep depressions by avoiding deflation..
Deflation --a steady ongoing decline in prices-- gave businesses and consumers powerful incentives to cut spending and hoard cash..
It reduced the ability of businesses and banks to service their debt, and might trigger a chain of big bankruptcies that would destroy confidence in the financial system, providing further incentives to hoard..
Such strong incentives to hoard rather than spend can keep demand low and falling, and unemployment high and rising, for a much longer time than even the most laissez-faire-oriented politician or economist had ever dared contemplate..
Hence the Keynesian solution: use monetary policy (lower interest rates) and fiscal policy (expanded government spending and reduced taxes) to keep the economy from ever approaching the precipice where deflation becomes possible..
But if this is an issue solved over fifty years ago, why is it haunting us now?.
Why is this menace a matter of grave concern in Japan today, and a threat worth worrying about in the US?.
In the late 1940s, those present at the creation of the post-World War II international economic order tried to create an international monetary system that would (a) allow for exchange rates stable enough for producers and consumers to escape the risks of excessive and irrational exchange rate fluctuations, (b) allow countries to follow their own domestic macroeconomic policies, and (c) prevent the catastrophic panics affecting not just individual banks but whole countries that produced the destructive international financial crisis of the Great Depression..
The result was the fixed-but-adjustable exchange rate system of Bretton Woods, which over time mutated into the floating-rate system of the 1980s..
Then came the 1990s..
All of a sudden tremendously destructive herd-driven financial crises were back: Mexico, Thailand, Korea, Brazil, and so on looked like nothing as much as the US financial panic of 1873 or the Austrian Creditanstalt crisis of 1931..
Argentina's crisis at the end of 2001 looked remarkably like Argentina's Baring Brothers crisis of 1890 -- save that politicians and international bankers seem to have had a much better idea of what to do to minimize the damage in 1890 than they do today..
In another sense, however, it is valuable to think of governments as being in competition--providing a more effective service to their people than other governments..
International comparison of systems therefore plays an important role..
In this spirit, this month's UNCTAD-UNDP conference--"Governance in Asia: Underpinning Competitiveness in a Global Economy"--will bring together policy-makers from across Asia to discuss the governance challenges that Asia faces..
The role of government--the only actor possessing the legitimacy of a popular mandate--is fundamentally important in steering a society forward..
The private sector and civil society are, of course, increasingly important partners for governments..
How relationships among these stakeholders function will powerfully influence Asia's future development..
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Replacing a governor whom they re-elected only a year before with Arnold Schwarzenegger must have given Californian voters an enormous--if guilty--pleasure..
Some members of the opposition in Germany would dearly love to do the same to Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, though they have not (yet!.
) found a film star to replace him..
But if those who built the post-World War II international monetary system worked to guard against the dangers posed by panic-driven international financial crises, why are these financial devils back?.
The truth is that economic policymakers are juggling sets of potential disasters, exchanging the one that appears most threatening for a threat that seems more distant..
In the US, the Bush Administration is skeptical of the stimulative power of monetary policy and wants bigger fiscal deficits to reduce unemployment, hoping that the future dangers posed by persistent deficits -- low investment, slow growth, loss of confidence, uncontrolled inflation and exchange rate depreciation-- can be finessed, or will not become visible until after the Bush team leaves office..
In Europe, the European Central Bank believes that the danger of uncontrolled inflation following a loss of public confidence in its commitment to low inflation outweighs the costs of European employment that is far too high..
In developing countries, capital controls to prevent financial crises are feared as obstacles to attracting the finance necessary for industrialization, and as potential sources of corruption as financial flows somehow pass through the hands of the Vice Minister of Finance's nephew-in-law..
Flexible exchange rates, designed to allow the market to signal when confidence in the currency is declining, also put exporters at a competitive disadvantage against foreign-country producers whose prices aren't batted around by unpredictable exchange rates..
Even the import-substitution policies, now universally scorned, were originally adopted by the developing world for good (as well as bad) reasons: the protectionist shutting-off of developed-country markets during the Great Depression which had disastrous consequences for the developing economies..
The ghosts of economics' past return because the lessons of the present are always oversold..
Politicians and policymakers advance their approach to economics as the "One True Doctrine.".
But what they are doing, however, is dealing with the biggest problem of the moment but at the price of removing institutions and policies that policymakers before them had put into place to control problems which they felt to be the most pressing..
Several other European governments find themselves in a similar state of unpopularity not long after being elected..
Ebeneezer Scrooge's nocturnal visitors were able to convince him of the errors of his ways..
Let's hope that today's economists also learn the lessons of their unwanted ghosts..
In the D-Mark's Shadow.
Getting Over the Irish Stew.
Justifying Humanitarian Intervention.
In 1998, I visited Central Asia's former Soviet republics for talks--concerning the democratic development that was--or should have been--taking place in those newly independent countries..
My hosts were former communist leaders who were now more or less democratically elected presidents..
Each spoke easily about institutions, democratic procedures, and respect for the rule of law..
But human rights were another matter entirely..
In each country, I presented lists of political prisoners and asked about their fates..
Beyond Europe this is true even for the recently acclaimed Brazilian President Luis Inacio "Lula" da Silva, to say nothing of Mexican President Vicente Fox and South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun, the latter having called for a referendum to help arrest his sinking popularity..
In one country, the president immediately decided to free a man accused of plotting a coup..
But even this seeming success was morally ambiguous..
The president had not made a political decision; he had bestowed a personal favor..
I was receiving a gift--itself merely another demonstration of the president's arbitrary exercise of power--not proof of respect for moral principles..
In one country, I spoke with a leader of the Islamic fundamentalist opposition, which had waged a long civil war against the government..
This man now styled himself as chairman of a "Committee of National Reconciliation.".
Guards armed to the teeth surrounded him, yet he firmly supported the notion of democratization..
Indeed, he saw it as his surest route to power, because the vast majority of the population thought exactly as he did..
Democracy, he hinted more ominously, would enable him to "eliminate"--he did not dwell on the exact meaning of the word--those who did not..
In such democracies without democrats, "human rights" are more problematic to discuss than procedural formalities, because they are not thought of as "rights" in the legal sense, but merely as pangs of conscience, or else as gifts to be exchanged for something else of value..
Electoral success, it appears, fades fast nowadays..
This distinction matters because it points to the limited effectiveness of formalized legal norms as a means of promoting human rights..
This gap between human rights and the behavior of rulers has brought about the greatest shift in the conduct of international affairs in our time--the advent of "humanitarian intervention.".
It arose initially outside established international institutions and the UN system, originating with the French group, Doctors Without Borders, which deemed human rights to be a value superior to national sovereignty..
Doctors Without Borders introduced the concept of "the right of intervention" in humanitarian disasters, bypassing the strictures of traditional international law..
The international system rather quickly adopted (and transformed) this notion, and numerous humanitarian.
NATO's intervention in Kosovo is a precedent that US Secretary of State Colin Powell used to justify the war with Iraq..
But, however compelling the cause of humanitarian military intervention, such actions must be brought under the umbrella of the UN Charter..
Promoting respect for human rights was, after all, the guiding principle behind the UN's establishment..
Its tasks in this area were affirmed in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the 1975 Helsinki Accords, which give human rights legal supremacy over the sovereignty of individual states..
Yet a glaring contradiction exists between the universality and supremacy of human rights and the principles of sovereignty and non-interference in states' internal affairs, which are also enshrined in UN documents..
So should every country adopt a recall procedure to maintain the legitimacy of governments?.
One way to overcome this chasm is to introduce into the UN Charter a new chapter devoted to human rights and to reformulate Chapter IV, which concerns the use of force in international relations..
Moreover, the principle of sovereignty itself needs redefinition..
What the world needs is a system of legal injunctions--bilateral and multilateral agreements, as well as appropriate monitoring and supervisory institutions--to regulate the use of force for humanitarian reasons..
Legal restraints on humanitarian intervention are necessary because dictators too often use it to justify criminal aggression..
Adolf Hitler minted this strategy when he dismantled Czechoslovakia--supposedly in defense of the Sudeten Germans--and later when he invaded my homeland, Poland..
As Milosevic showed again in the 1990s, when he claimed to be defending innocent Serbs in Croatia and Bosnia, justifying military intervention solely on the basis of moral principles leaves too much room for their distortion and abuse..
This is why debates about reforming the Security Council should focus not on changing its composition, but on its mission..
The Council should be made explicitly responsible for "human security" and be given a responsibility to protect it, in addition to its current role in safeguarding more traditional notions of international security..
The principle of non-intervention in a state's internal affairs was never absolute, and globalization confronts it with a radical challenge..
The term "international relations" assumes the Westphalian order of commitments among sovereign nation states, which replaced the medieval order of communities defined by personal fealty to a king..
Absolutely not..
But today it is the Westphalian order that is in decline, along with the significance of state borders..
Democracy, in the words of the philosopher Karl Popper, is about being able to remove those in power without violence; it is in this sense about trial and error..
But leaders must be given the chance to govern..
Indeed, they need a chance to make mistakes and to learn and recover from their errors, as long as their decisions do not affect the foundations of the democratic order itself..
Trial and error implies the opportunity to err before we try again..
Californian voters' first mistake is thus what may be called "the lure of the immediate"--none too surprising in a state where instant gratification is supposedly a core value..
But sometimes this desire seems overwhelming in post-modern democracies everywhere..
Indeed, democracy nowadays has embraced a pop culture of rapidly passing fads; today's hysteria-generating pop group is forgotten tomorrow, and there are always more waiting in the wings..
In politics this can be dangerous, because it encourages basing decisions, no matter how weighty, on whatever popular opinion momentarily prevails..
The call for more referenda both reflects and fuels this trend..
Referenda are for the most part snapshots..
Switzerland, with its generally slower pace and its thorough political debates before votes are held, may be the exception..
As a rule however, referenda measure the popularity of political leaders at a particular moment, regardless of the issue at stake..
If and when Britain votes on joining the Euro, the result will most likely tell us all sorts of things about Tony Blair and about the European Union, but little about the merits of the common currency..
So the case for representative government remains strong..
Democracy is government by debate, by taking important decisions after thorough deliberation of the kind that--at least in large countries--must be conducted in a parliament through elected representatives..
Sometimes parliaments wish to act quickly, and perhaps must do so, but as a rule they take enough time to examine issues fully..
Parliaments talk before reaching conclusions; hence their name..
Consider Germany, where some leaders of the opposition Christian Democrats yearn to sink the Schröder government..
Clearly, the reforms proposed and already partly enacted by the government are unpopular, and there is little doubt that, a year after their re-election, the coalition of the Social Democrats and the Greens would not stand much of a chance at the polls..
But who knows what the electorate will think in three years, at the end of the government's full term in office?.
By the time of the next regularly scheduled election, it could become clear that there were no real alternatives to Schröder's policies, and it could even be the case that the predicted beneficial effects of painful reforms will become apparent by then..
Leadership needs time to take and implement unpopular decisions as well as popular ones..
Leaders themselves need the nerve to take often precarious parliamentary majorities through the troughs of popularity..
This is why they should commit their cruelest deeds in the first year and soften up as the next election approaches..
The uneasy partnership of Prime Minister Tony Blair and Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown is a good example of this tactic..
Leaders who never risk their popularity are not worth their position..
So California has set a bad example, and Californians will probably pay a heavy price for it..
They may not pay as heavy a price as France a century and a half ago, when the popularly elected Louis Napoleon transformed himself, via a wildly popular referendum, into Napoleon III--that vote being the last the French would enjoy until the end of the Second Empire..
Californians, of course, won't be disenfranchised, but their willfulness threatens to yield a wayward and irresponsible form of state politics..
To be sure, democracy implies limiting the time that the powerful have to exercise their power without challenge..
An effective democracy must give them enough time to win the support of those elected to legislate and to carry out their program..
These two imperatives are inherently contradictory, but the balance between them is still best achieved through representative, parliamentary democracy..
Anything else is likely to be about as stable as this week's top ten pop songs..
Herbert Hoover and the Stability Pact.
In mid-July the great-and-good finance ministers of the European Monetary Union (EMU) gathered to consider the euro zone's economic condition..
They ruminated over the most recent economic forecast, which projects annual GDP growth in the euro zone this year at a pathetically anemic 0.7%..
Then, to a minister, without exception, they all but decided that their economies should suffer more of the same, if not worse..
They reiterated their commitment to the Stability and Growth Pact, which requires euro-zone countries to raise taxes and cut spending, putting even more downward pressure on their economies..
The Pact is already knocking Germany into recession, and Italy's government is struggling to revise its growth forecasts fast enough to keep up with falling output..
But none of this is apparently enough to force officials to re-examine their priorities..
Some EU finance ministers still view the Stability Pact as the ``cornerstone'' of EMU..
Others talk of the importance of obeying the ``rules of the game.''.
Still others say that while it is clearly essential to restore economic growth, the recovery must occur ``within the spirit of the Pact.''.
From the American side of the Atlantic, all of these rationales seem utterly bizarre..
The last time an American government tried to ensure a balanced budget in the face of a recession was over seventy years ago, during the presidency of Herbert Hoover at the outset of the Great Depression..
Since then the broad consensus in the US has been that cyclical economic distress requires the use of budget deficits to ameliorate suffering, stimulate aggregate demand, and hasten recovery..
Economists call these cyclical fiscal boosts ``automatic stabilizers.''.
When private incomes fall, so do public revenues..
The reduction in tax collection can increase disposable income..
But, more importantly, when private incomes fall, government social-welfare expenditures rise, sparking a recovery in demand, output, investment, and employment..
The fall in taxes and the rise in spending do widen the budget deficit, but in a healthy and useful way..
On the American side of the Atlantic, the usefulness of these automatic fiscal stabilizers is unchallenged..
On the contrary, whenever recession threatens, political debate revolves around whether they need to be reinforced by.
Nor is it even a fiscal discipline issue..
Whenever proposals have surfaced for some sort of balanced-budget amendment to the US Constitution, proponents have typically included exemptions not just for war, but also for recessions..
We know the origins of the Stability and Growth Pact..
Northern European countries--particularly Germany and the Netherlands--prided themselves on traditionally maintaining moderate debt-to-GDP ratios and relatively low interest rates..
These countries saw that Southern European countries--Italy and Greece were the biggest worries--traditionally had high debt-to-GDP ratios and relatively high nominal interest rates because of their perceived tolerance of inflation..
The Northern European countries feared that deficit spending by the South might ultimately create pressure for partial monetization of their debt through inflation of the euro--or, more precisely, their leaders feared that investors, fearing the same thing, would demand higher interest rates..
The Stability and Growth Pact was intended to keep the public debts of southern Europe low, and thus keep interest rates low by reassuring investors that national debts would never be allowed to rise high enough to generate serious inflationary pressures..
But if you look at the euro zone's economic problems today, the danger of high long-term nominal interest rates does not even rank among investors' top ten concerns..
At the very least, investors clearly do not fear that high debt will lead governments to stoke inflation by printing more money..
The EU's problems are stagnant output, high structural unemployment, weak productivity growth, the wasteful and unfair Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), and the forthcoming structural adjustments from the expansion of the EU itself..
From one perspective, it is good that the euro zone's finance ministers are eager to keep their national debts low in the long term: it is a sign that the victories over inflation won in the 1970's will not be casually thrown away..
But it is dangerous to become obsessed with the past..
There is no more certain route to economic disaster than to put on historical blinders..
As Herbert Hoover could attest, when we see only the economic policy problems of a generation ago, we risk missing the hazards that lie directly in front of our eyes..
The Ghosts of Economics Past.
In Charles Dicken's great novel "A Christmas Carol," the soulless businessman Ebeneezer Scrooge is tormented by a visit from the Spirit of Christmas Past..
Today, economists are similarly troubled by unwanted ghosts, as they ponder the reappearance of economic ills long thought buried and dead..
From Stephen Roach at Morgan Stanley to Paul Krugman at Princeton, to the Governors of the US Federal Reserve and the senior staff at the European Central Bank, to almost everyone in Japan, economists all over the world are worrying about deflation..
Their thoughts retrace the economic thinking of over fifty years ago, a time when economists concluded that the thing to do with deflation was to avoid it like the plague..
Back in 1933 Irving Fisher --Milton Friedman's predecessor atop America's monetarist school of economists-- announced that governments could prevent deep depressions by avoiding deflation..
Deflation --a steady ongoing decline in prices-- gave businesses and consumers powerful incentives to cut spending and hoard cash..
It reduced the ability of businesses and banks to service their debt, and might trigger a chain of big bankruptcies that would destroy confidence in the financial system, providing further incentives to hoard..
Such strong incentives to hoard rather than spend can keep demand low and falling, and unemployment high and rising, for a much longer time than even the most laissez-faire-oriented politician or economist had ever dared contemplate..
Hence the Keynesian solution: use monetary policy (lower interest rates) and fiscal policy (expanded government spending and reduced taxes) to keep the economy from ever approaching the precipice where deflation becomes possible..
But if this is an issue solved over fifty years ago, why is it haunting us now?.
Why is this menace a matter of grave concern in Japan today, and a threat worth worrying about in the US?.
In the late 1940s, those present at the creation of the post-World War II international economic order tried to create an international monetary system that would (a) allow for exchange rates stable enough for producers and consumers to escape the risks of excessive and irrational exchange rate fluctuations, (b) allow countries to follow their own domestic macroeconomic policies, and (c) prevent the catastrophic panics affecting not just individual banks but whole countries that produced the destructive international financial crisis of the Great Depression..
The result was the fixed-but-adjustable exchange rate system of Bretton Woods, which over time mutated into the floating-rate system of the 1980s..
Then came the 1990s..
All of a sudden tremendously destructive herd-driven financial crises were back: Mexico, Thailand, Korea, Brazil, and so on looked like nothing as much as the US financial panic of 1873 or the Austrian Creditanstalt crisis of 1931..
Argentina's crisis at the end of 2001 looked remarkably like Argentina's Baring Brothers crisis of 1890 -- save that politicians and international bankers seem to have had a much better idea of what to do to minimize the damage in 1890 than they do today..
In another sense, however, it is valuable to think of governments as being in competition--providing a more effective service to their people than other governments..
International comparison of systems therefore plays an important role..
In this spirit, this month's UNCTAD-UNDP conference--"Governance in Asia: Underpinning Competitiveness in a Global Economy"--will bring together policy-makers from across Asia to discuss the governance challenges that Asia faces..
The role of government--the only actor possessing the legitimacy of a popular mandate--is fundamentally important in steering a society forward..
The private sector and civil society are, of course, increasingly important partners for governments..
How relationships among these stakeholders function will powerfully influence Asia's future development..
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Replacing a governor whom they re-elected only a year before with Arnold Schwarzenegger must have given Californian voters an enormous--if guilty--pleasure..
Some members of the opposition in Germany would dearly love to do the same to Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, though they have not (yet!.
) found a film star to replace him..
But if those who built the post-World War II international monetary system worked to guard against the dangers posed by panic-driven international financial crises, why are these financial devils back?.
The truth is that economic policymakers are juggling sets of potential disasters, exchanging the one that appears most threatening for a threat that seems more distant..
In the US, the Bush Administration is skeptical of the stimulative power of monetary policy and wants bigger fiscal deficits to reduce unemployment, hoping that the future dangers posed by persistent deficits -- low investment, slow growth, loss of confidence, uncontrolled inflation and exchange rate depreciation-- can be finessed, or will not become visible until after the Bush team leaves office..
In Europe, the European Central Bank believes that the danger of uncontrolled inflation following a loss of public confidence in its commitment to low inflation outweighs the costs of European employment that is far too high..
In developing countries, capital controls to prevent financial crises are feared as obstacles to attracting the finance necessary for industrialization, and as potential sources of corruption as financial flows somehow pass through the hands of the Vice Minister of Finance's nephew-in-law..
Flexible exchange rates, designed to allow the market to signal when confidence in the currency is declining, also put exporters at a competitive disadvantage against foreign-country producers whose prices aren't batted around by unpredictable exchange rates..
Even the import-substitution policies, now universally scorned, were originally adopted by the developing world for good (as well as bad) reasons: the protectionist shutting-off of developed-country markets during the Great Depression which had disastrous consequences for the developing economies..
The ghosts of economics' past return because the lessons of the present are always oversold..
Politicians and policymakers advance their approach to economics as the "One True Doctrine.".
But what they are doing, however, is dealing with the biggest problem of the moment but at the price of removing institutions and policies that policymakers before them had put into place to control problems which they felt to be the most pressing..
Several other European governments find themselves in a similar state of unpopularity not long after being elected..
Ebeneezer Scrooge's nocturnal visitors were able to convince him of the errors of his ways..
Let's hope that today's economists also learn the lessons of their unwanted ghosts..
In the D-Mark's Shadow.
Getting Over the Irish Stew..
Justifying Humanitarian Intervention..
In 1998, I visited Central Asia's former Soviet republics for talks--concerning the democratic development that was--or should have been--taking place in those newly independent countries..
My hosts were former communist leaders who were now more or less democratically elected presidents..
Each spoke easily about institutions, democratic procedures, and respect for the rule of law..
But human rights were another matter entirely..
In each country, I presented lists of political prisoners and asked about their fates..
Beyond Europe this is true even for the recently acclaimed Brazilian President Luis Inacio "Lula" da Silva, to say nothing of Mexican President Vicente Fox and South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun, the latter having called for a referendum to help arrest his sinking popularity..
In one country, the president immediately decided to free a man accused of plotting a coup..
But even this seeming success was morally ambiguous..
The president had not made a political decision; he had bestowed a personal favor..
I was receiving a gift--itself merely another demonstration of the president's arbitrary exercise of power--not proof of respect for moral principles..
In one country, I spoke with a leader of the Islamic fundamentalist opposition, which had waged a long civil war against the government..
This man now styled himself as chairman of a "Committee of National Reconciliation.".
Guards armed to the teeth surrounded him, yet he firmly supported the notion of democratization..
Indeed, he saw it as his surest route to power, because the vast majority of the population thought exactly as he did..
Democracy, he hinted more ominously, would enable him to "eliminate"--he did not dwell on the exact meaning of the word--those who did not..
In such democracies without democrats, "human rights" are more problematic to discuss than procedural formalities, because they are not thought of as "rights" in the legal sense, but merely as pangs of conscience, or else as gifts to be exchanged for something else of value..
Electoral success, it appears, fades fast nowadays..
This distinction matters because it points to the limited effectiveness of formalized legal norms as a means of promoting human rights..
This gap between human rights and the behavior of rulers has brought about the greatest shift in the conduct of international affairs in our time--the advent of "humanitarian intervention.".
It arose initially outside established international institutions and the UN system, originating with the French group, Doctors Without Borders, which deemed human rights to be a value superior to national sovereignty..
Doctors Without Borders introduced the concept of "the right of intervention" in humanitarian disasters, bypassing the strictures of traditional international law..
The international system rather quickly adopted (and transformed) this notion, and numerous humanitarian.
NATO's intervention in Kosovo is a precedent that US Secretary of State Colin Powell used to justify the war with Iraq..
But, however compelling the cause of humanitarian military intervention, such actions must be brought under the umbrella of the UN Charter..
Promoting respect for human rights was, after all, the guiding principle behind the UN's establishment..
Its tasks in this area were affirmed in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the 1975 Helsinki Accords, which give human rights legal supremacy over the sovereignty of individual states..
Yet a glaring contradiction exists between the universality and supremacy of human rights and the principles of sovereignty and non-interference in states' internal affairs, which are also enshrined in UN documents..
So should every country adopt a recall procedure to maintain the legitimacy of governments?.
One way to overcome this chasm is to introduce into the UN Charter a new chapter devoted to human rights and to reformulate Chapter IV, which concerns the use of force in international relations..
Moreover, the principle of sovereignty itself needs redefinition..
What the world needs is a system of legal injunctions--bilateral and multilateral agreements, as well as appropriate monitoring and supervisory institutions--to regulate the use of force for humanitarian reasons..
Legal restraints on humanitarian intervention are necessary because dictators too often use it to justify criminal aggression..
Adolf Hitler minted this strategy when he dismantled Czechoslovakia--supposedly in defense of the Sudeten Germans--and later when he invaded my homeland, Poland..
As Milosevic showed again in the 1990s, when he claimed to be defending innocent Serbs in Croatia and Bosnia, justifying military intervention solely on the basis of moral principles leaves too much room for their distortion and abuse..
This is why debates about reforming the Security Council should focus not on changing its composition, but on its mission..
The Council should be made explicitly responsible for "human security" and be given a responsibility to protect it, in addition to its current role in safeguarding more traditional notions of international security..
The principle of non-intervention in a state's internal affairs was never absolute, and globalization confronts it with a radical challenge..
The term "international relations" assumes the Westphalian order of commitments among sovereign nation states, which replaced the medieval order of communities defined by personal fealty to a king..
Absolutely not..
But today it is the Westphalian order that is in decline, along with the significance of state borders..
Democracy, in the words of the philosopher Karl Popper, is about being able to remove those in power without violence; it is in this sense about trial and error..
But leaders must be given the chance to govern..
Indeed, they need a chance to make mistakes and to learn and recover from their errors, as long as their decisions do not affect the foundations of the democratic order itself..
Trial and error implies the opportunity to err before we try again..
Californian voters' first mistake is thus what may be called "the lure of the immediate"--none too surprising in a state where instant gratification is supposedly a core value..
But sometimes this desire seems overwhelming in post-modern democracies everywhere..
Indeed, democracy nowadays has embraced a pop culture of rapidly passing fads; today's hysteria-generating pop group is forgotten tomorrow, and there are always more waiting in the wings..
In politics this can be dangerous, because it encourages basing decisions, no matter how weighty, on whatever popular opinion momentarily prevails..
The call for more referenda both reflects and fuels this trend..
Referenda are for the most part snapshots..
Switzerland, with its generally slower pace and its thorough political debates before votes are held, may be the exception..
As a rule however, referenda measure the popularity of political leaders at a particular moment, regardless of the issue at stake..
If and when Britain votes on joining the Euro, the result will most likely tell us all sorts of things about Tony Blair and about the European Union, but little about the merits of the common currency..
So the case for representative government remains strong..
Democracy is government by debate, by taking important decisions after thorough deliberation of the kind that--at least in large countries--must be conducted in a parliament through elected representatives..
Sometimes parliaments wish to act quickly, and perhaps must do so, but as a rule they take enough time to examine issues fully..
Parliaments talk before reaching conclusions; hence their name..
Consider Germany, where some leaders of the opposition Christian Democrats yearn to sink the Schröder government..
Clearly, the reforms proposed and already partly enacted by the government are unpopular, and there is little doubt that, a year after their re-election, the coalition of the Social Democrats and the Greens would not stand much of a chance at the polls..
But who knows what the electorate will think in three years, at the end of the government's full term in office?.
By the time of the next regularly scheduled election, it could become clear that there were no real alternatives to Schröder's policies, and it could even be the case that the predicted beneficial effects of painful reforms will become apparent by then..
Leadership needs time to take and implement unpopular decisions as well as popular ones..
Leaders themselves need the nerve to take often precarious parliamentary majorities through the troughs of popularity..
This is why they should commit their cruelest deeds in the first year and soften up as the next election approaches..
The uneasy partnership of Prime Minister Tony Blair and Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown is a good example of this tactic..
Leaders who never risk their popularity are not worth their position..
So California has set a bad example, and Californians will probably pay a heavy price for it..
They may not pay as heavy a price as France a century and a half ago, when the popularly elected Louis Napoleon transformed himself, via a wildly popular referendum, into Napoleon III--that vote being the last the French would enjoy until the end of the Second Empire..
Californians, of course, won't be disenfranchised, but their willfulness threatens to yield a wayward and irresponsible form of state politics..
To be sure, democracy implies limiting the time that the powerful have to exercise their power without challenge..
An effective democracy must give them enough time to win the support of those elected to legislate and to carry out their program..
These two imperatives are inherently contradictory, but the balance between them is still best achieved through representative, parliamentary democracy..
Anything else is likely to be about as stable as this week's top ten pop songs..
Herbert Hoover and the Stability Pact.
In mid-July the great-and-good finance ministers of the European Monetary Union (EMU) gathered to consider the euro zone's economic condition..
They ruminated over the most recent economic forecast, which projects annual GDP growth in the euro zone this year at a pathetically anemic 0.7%..
Then, to a minister, without exception, they all but decided that their economies should suffer more of the same, if not worse..
They reiterated their commitment to the Stability and Growth Pact, which requires euro-zone countries to raise taxes and cut spending, putting even more downward pressure on their economies..
The Pact is already knocking Germany into recession, and Italy's government is struggling to revise its growth forecasts fast enough to keep up with falling output..
But none of this is apparently enough to force officials to re-examine their priorities..
Some EU finance ministers still view the Stability Pact as the ``cornerstone'' of EMU..
Others talk of the importance of obeying the ``rules of the game.''.
Still others say that while it is clearly essential to restore economic growth, the recovery must occur ``within the spirit of the Pact.''.
From the American side of the Atlantic, all of these rationales seem utterly bizarre..
The last time an American government tried to ensure a balanced budget in the face of a recession was over seventy years ago, during the presidency of Herbert Hoover at the outset of the Great Depression..
Since then the broad consensus in the US has been that cyclical economic distress requires the use of budget deficits to ameliorate suffering, stimulate aggregate demand, and hasten recovery..
Economists call these cyclical fiscal boosts ``automatic stabilizers.''.
When private incomes fall, so do public revenues..
The reduction in tax collection can increase disposable income..
But, more importantly, when private incomes fall, government social-welfare expenditures rise, sparking a recovery in demand, output, investment, and employment..
The fall in taxes and the rise in spending do widen the budget deficit, but in a healthy and useful way..
On the American side of the Atlantic, the usefulness of these automatic fiscal stabilizers is unchallenged..
On the contrary, whenever recession threatens, political debate revolves around whether they need to be reinforced by.
Nor is it even a fiscal discipline issue..
Whenever proposals have surfaced for some sort of balanced-budget amendment to the US Constitution, proponents have typically included exemptions not just for war, but also for recessions..
We know the origins of the Stability and Growth Pact..
Northern European countries--particularly Germany and the Netherlands--prided themselves on traditionally maintaining moderate debt-to-GDP ratios and relatively low interest rates..
These countries saw that Southern European countries--Italy and Greece were the biggest worries--traditionally had high debt-to-GDP ratios and relatively high nominal interest rates because of their perceived tolerance of inflation..
The Northern European countries feared that deficit spending by the South might ultimately create pressure for partial monetization of their debt through inflation of the euro--or, more precisely, their leaders feared that investors, fearing the same thing, would demand higher interest rates..
The Stability and Growth Pact was intended to keep the public debts of southern Europe low, and thus keep interest rates low by reassuring investors that national debts would never be allowed to rise high enough to generate serious inflationary pressures..
But if you look at the euro zone's economic problems today, the danger of high long-term nominal interest rates does not even rank among investors' top ten concerns..
At the very least, investors clearly do not fear that high debt will lead governments to stoke inflation by printing more money..
The EU's problems are stagnant output, high structural unemployment, weak productivity growth, the wasteful and unfair Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), and the forthcoming structural adjustments from the expansion of the EU itself..
From one perspective, it is good that the euro zone's finance ministers are eager to keep their national debts low in the long term: it is a sign that the victories over inflation won in the 1970's will not be casually thrown away..
But it is dangerous to become obsessed with the past..
There is no more certain route to economic disaster than to put on historical blinders..
As Herbert Hoover could attest, when we see only the economic policy problems of a generation ago, we risk missing the hazards that lie directly in front of our eyes..
The Ghosts of Economics Past.
In Charles Dicken's great novel "A Christmas Carol," the soulless businessman Ebeneezer Scrooge is tormented by a visit from the Spirit of Christmas Past..
Today, economists are similarly troubled by unwanted ghosts, as they ponder the reappearance of economic ills long thought buried and dead..
From Stephen Roach at Morgan Stanley to Paul Krugman at Princeton, to the Governors of the US Federal Reserve and the senior staff at the European Central Bank, to almost everyone in Japan, economists all over the world are worrying about deflation..
Their thoughts retrace the economic thinking of over fifty years ago, a time when economists concluded that the thing to do with deflation was to avoid it like the plague..
Back in 1933 Irving Fisher --Milton Friedman's predecessor atop America's monetarist school of economists-- announced that governments could prevent deep depressions by avoiding deflation..
Deflation --a steady ongoing decline in prices-- gave businesses and consumers powerful incentives to cut spending and hoard cash..
It reduced the ability of businesses and banks to service their debt, and might trigger a chain of big bankruptcies that would destroy confidence in the financial system, providing further incentives to hoard..
Such strong incentives to hoard rather than spend can keep demand low and falling, and unemployment high and rising, for a much longer time than even the most laissez-faire-oriented politician or economist had ever dared contemplate..
Hence the Keynesian solution: use monetary policy (lower interest rates) and fiscal policy (expanded government spending and reduced taxes) to keep the economy from ever approaching the precipice where deflation becomes possible..
But if this is an issue solved over fifty years ago, why is it haunting us now?.
Why is this menace a matter of grave concern in Japan today, and a threat worth worrying about in the US?.
In the late 1940s, those present at the creation of the post-World War II international economic order tried to create an international monetary system that would (a) allow for exchange rates stable enough for producers and consumers to escape the risks of excessive and irrational exchange rate fluctuations, (b) allow countries to follow their own domestic macroeconomic policies, and (c) prevent the catastrophic panics affecting not just individual banks but whole countries that produced the destructive international financial crisis of the Great Depression..
The result was the fixed-but-adjustable exchange rate system of Bretton Woods, which over time mutated into the floating-rate system of the 1980s..
Then came the 1990s..
All of a sudden tremendously destructive herd-driven financial crises were back: Mexico, Thailand, Korea, Brazil, and so on looked like nothing as much as the US financial panic of 1873 or the Austrian Creditanstalt crisis of 1931..
Argentina's crisis at the end of 2001 looked remarkably like Argentina's Baring Brothers crisis of 1890 -- save that politicians and international bankers seem to have had a much better idea of what to do to minimize the damage in 1890 than they do today..
